npj | microgravity Perspective
Published in cooperation with the Biodesign Institute at Arizona State University, with the support of NASA
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5
Cryogenic propellant management in
space: open challenges and perspectives
Check for updates
Alessia Simonini 1 , Michael Dreyer2, Annafederica Urbano3, Francesco Sanfedino3,
Takehiro Himeno4, Philipp Behruzi5,M a r cA v i l a 2, Jorge Pinho 1, Laura Peveroni1 &
Jean-Baptiste Gouriet1
This paper presents open challenges and perspectives of propellant management for crewed deep
space exploration. The most promising propellants are liquid hydrogen and liquid methane, together
with liquid oxygen as an oxidizer. These ﬂuids remain liquid only at cryogenic conditions, that is, at
temperatures lower than 120 K. To extend the duration of space exploration missions, or even to
enable them, the storage and refueling from a cryogenic on-orbit depot is necessary. We review
reference missions, architectures, and technology demonstrators and explain the main operations
that are considered as enablers for cryogenic storage and transfer. We summarize the state of the art
for each of them, showing that many gaps in physical knowledge still need to be ﬁlled. This paper is
based on recommendations originally proposed in a White Paper for ESA ’s SciSpacE strategy.
Since theﬁrst crewed mission reached the surface of the moon more than 50
years ago, many nations strive for more open and broader access to space.
The research and development to enable and improve space accessibility by
robotic machines and human beings led to a discovery boost in severalﬁelds.
Physical and biological sciences havehad a new ground of exploration, but
new technologies have also enabled a better life on Earth1.A f t e rm o r et h a n
50 years, research and development is still needed to push the boundaries of
space exploration. Human space endeavors beyond low Earth orbit (LEO)
a r en o wt h en e wt a r g e t2–4. Propulsion is an important subsystem of a
spacecraft or launcher, and propellant is by far its largest mass fraction. For
instance, ~98.5% of the Saturn V launch mass was propellant and propul-
sion systems5.
Many national space agencies are working to enable deep space
exploration. One example is NASA’s exploration program, which outlines
the basic requirements for future exploration missions3. On 14.10.2020, one
of NASA ’s tipping point selection was: “Cryogenic Fluid Management
Technology Demonstration: NASA and industry partners have developed
and tested numerous technologies to enable long-term cryogenic ﬂuid
management, which is essential for establishing a sustainable presence on
the Moon and enabling crewed missions to Mars. Implementation of the
technologies in operational missions requires further maturation through
in-space demonstrations.” The awarded companies are Eta Space of Meritt
Island, Florida, Lockheed Martin of Littleton, Colorado, SpaceX of
Hawthorne, California, and United Launch Alliance (ULA) of Centennial,
Colorado.
In the last two decades, several propulsion systems have been proposed
and analysed for deep space exploration. The most promising ones are those
fully based on nuclear thermal power (requiring liquid hydrogen) and on
nuclear electric power plus cryogenic chemical propulsion for large velocity
change maneuvers3,6,7.T h es t u d i e s6 and7 show that large amounts of cryo-
genic fuels need to be stored in space and transferred between spacecraft. For
this reason, we focus this review paper on physical problems which are
encountered in cryogenic systems only8. Cryogenic fuels (propellants, i.e.,
hydrogen, methane, and oxidizer, i.e.,oxygen) have several advantages: they
provide a high speciﬁc impulse, are non-toxic, and can be produced in situ
(In Situ Resource Utilization - ISRU), i.e., on the surface of the Moon or
Mars9. The enabling capabilities for cryogenic propellants are the long-term
storage in space and on planets, and the transfer between depots and
spacecraft. Depots will be launched empty or partly ﬁlled, and need to be
reﬁlled in space. A series of documents that explain the actual limitation and
the current interest in cryogenic propellant management physics can be
found in the references10,11.
This review is organized in two part s. Firstly, the application per-
spectives are presented, summarizingthe conditions of a typical reference
mission and the associated architecture. This part is used to identify the
requirements in terms of the size and working conditions of a possible tank
1Liquid and Solid Propellant Research Expert Group, von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics, 72, chaussée de Waterloo, Rhode-Saint-Genèse 1640, Bel gium.
2Center of Applied Space Technology and Microgravity (ZARM), University of Bremen, Am Fallturm 2, Bremen 28359, Germany.3Fédération ENAC ISAE-SUPAERO
ONERA, Université de Toulouse, 10 avenue Edouard Belin, Toulouse BP 54032 - 31055, France. 4Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, The University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 138656, Japan. 5JTLF, ArianeGroup GmbH, 1 Airbus-Allee, Bremen 28199, Germany.
e-mail: alessia.simonini@vki.ac.be
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

enabling human deep space exploration. Then, the most relevant techno-
logical demonstrators are discussed as background knowledge. The most
common phenomena occurring in a typic al architecture are illustrated
together with gaps in physical knowle dge associated with cryogenic pro-
pellant management.
Application perspectives and background
Reference missions and architectures
A successful exploration mission requires spacecraft to change their velocity
(also called△V maneuvers) in order to follow precise trajectories. Velocity
change requirements are derived from orbital and spaceﬂight mechanics,
involving the balance of propulsive, gravitational, and aerodynamic forces
when entering the atmosphere of planets. The propulsive forces are pro-
duced by the spacecraft engine. Propellants are grouped into storable and
cryogenic propellants. The main difference is the achievable speciﬁci m p u l s e
Isp or thrust per unit massﬂow rate, which is deﬁned as the ratio between the
thrust and the product of massﬂow rate and the gravitational acceleration
constant. Storable propellants (hydrazine, monomethylhydrazine, and
nitrogen tetroxide) have a lower speciﬁc impulse, but they remain liquid at
ambient conditions and do not need cooling. On the other side, cryogenics
are in a gaseous phase at ambient conditions, because they are characterized
by very low saturation temperatures at normal pressure, 101,325 Pa (20 K
for hydrogen, 112 K for methane). As a consequence, they need to be cooled
down in order to be stored in a liquid phase and require good insulation.
Design reference missions (DRM ’s) are required to compute the
necessary velocity changes. The Artemis program is the current NASA
project to return humans to the moon’s surface, with the purpose to stay and
to prepare for human Mars exploration missions. The ﬁrst Artemis
uncrewed mission around the Moon was completed in December 2022 with
the ﬁrst ﬂight of the Space Launch System (SLS) and the secondﬂight of the
Orion Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV) with the European Service Module
(ESM) (see nasa.gov/specials/artemis).
A crewed Mars mission requires larger velocity changes and shall be
used here as an example12. Conjunction and opposition class missions were
t a k e nb yO l e s o ne ta l .i n2 0 2 16 for a concept of operations (see their page 24).
The baseline is a nuclear electric propulsion (NEP)— a chemical vehicle with
liquid methane and liquid oxygen for high-thrust maneuvers. Typical
mission milestones are:
1. Several heavy launches from Earth to Low Earth orbit (LEO)
2. Rendezvous and docking, assembly in LEO
3. Transfer to trans Lunar orbit (TLO)
4. Rendezvous and docking with habitat
5. Heavy launch from Earth to TLO with CEV and crew transfer to
habitat
6. Trans Mars injection (TMI)
7. Injection into Mars orbit
8. Descent to Mars surface
9. Surface mission (30 days)
10. Ascent to Mars orbit
11. Trans Earth injection (TEI)
12. Trans Lunar orbit and crew transfer to the CEV
13. Return to Earth surface
This concept of operations requi res a tanker spacecraft to fuel the
chemical stage in Earth orbit.
Other scenarios (see ref. 7) require nuclear thermal propulsion with
liquid hydrogen as propellant, heated by the nuclear reactor. This does not
require an oxidizer and produces the highest speci ﬁci m p u l s e .M o r e
information on possible mission scenarios, road maps, and technological
challenges are given by refs.10,13–15.
In this review, we follow the rationale of Hartwig8 for propellant depots
in orbit. Without the ability to fuel and/or refuel spacecrafts in orbit, all the
propellant has to be taken from Earth to reach the destination and return to
Earth. This traditional method requires a heavy launch vehicle, such as the
Space Launch System (SLS), with a payload mass of 95 t to LEO and 27 t for
trans Lunar injection. This will not be sufﬁcient to send humans beyond the
Moon. A possible solution is to use a propellant depot.
A propellant depot is deﬁned as an orbiting propellant storage vessel
that can host fuels for up to several years7. The depot shall be launched and
brought to its ﬁnal orbit in an empty or partially ﬁlled state, since its wet
mass might exceed the capacities of available launchers. Propellant transfer
from a tanker to the depot and from the depot to an exploration spacecraft is
required. Depots have multiple advantages:
1. The dry mass of an exploration payload, launched from the surface of
the Earth, may be larger, because it will be fueled in space.
2. Commercial launch services can be used to supply and re-supply
the depot.
3. The depot could be used to ﬁll or re-ﬁll the exploration spacecraft.
4. Depot technologies could be used to enhance planetary and Earth
sciences16.
Cryogenic ﬂuid management (CFM) technologies are required to
enable all necessary steps, such as draining, chill down, transfer, andﬁlling in
both directions. In Table 1, rough order of magnitude numbers from dif-
ferent studies on propellant depots in space are summarized.
An important consideration is the location of the depot. First of all, a
concept of operations (CONOPS) is required. Probable locations of the
depot (or depots) are:
1. low Earth orbit (LEO), height of orbit above surface 160 km to
1000 km, time of orbit 90 min
2. geosynchronous orbit (GEO), height of orbit above surface 35,786 km,
time of orbit 24 h
3. Earth-Moon Lagrange 1 orbit (EML1), distance of the orbit from the
center of the Earth 326,400 km (85% of the Earth-Moon distance of
384,400 km), time of orbit 29.5 d
4. Earth-Moon Lagrange 2 orbit (EML2), distance of the orbit from the
center of the Earth 448,900 km, i.e., 60,000 km beyond the Moon, time
of orbit 29.5 d
Some features are the△V requirements to reach the depot and to keep
the depot where it belongs, the thermal loads, the storage duration, and the
possible problems associated with radio interference and space. The most
important quantity is the boil-off loss. This is the mass of liquid propellant
which is converted into a gas due to the incoming heatﬂuxes.
Possible architectures for such orbital propellant depots have been
considered by Gaebler et al. in their 2009 paper17. An example of an orbital
depot with multiple propellant tanks is shown in Fig. 3 in ref.17.I ts h o u l db e
capable of storing 330 t of propellant in space. Each tank measures 11 m in
length and 5 m in diameter. A total of 8 tanks are considered. A reusable
Table 1 | Rough order of magnitude parameters for propellant
depots in space
Depot type dual ﬂuid, 6 to 8 tanks 17
Capacity 50 t per tank
Diameter 5 m
Length 10 m to 20 m
Fluids hydrogen, methane, oxygen 11,114
Storage time 6 month to 12 month 20
Acceleration From microgravity to high-g 8,17
Pressure 100 kPa to 350 kPa 8,11
Conditioning Autogeneous pressurization 8,11,13,115
Heat ﬂux 50 W m 2 to 100 W m2 26,116
Transfer rate 0.15 kg s 1 to 4.4 kg s1 117,118
Wall material Aluminum 25
The data have been compiled from different sources.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 2

transfer vehicle (RTV) will perform transits between the low Earth orbit
(LEO) of the depot and a low Lunar orbit (LLO). An example of such a
vehicle is shown in ref. 17 in ﬁgure 4.
In their 2010 paper, ref. 18 advocate for a depot-based space
transportation architecture. The concept consists of a very basic
depot in LEO and subsequent EML1 and EML2 depots. The EML2
location seems to be the best due to the thermal, micrometeoroid,
and atomic oxygen environment . Propellant stocked at EML2 is
nearly at Earth escape energy. Transfer between LEO and EML2
requires a △V =3 . 2k m s1. The depot development begins with a test-
bed, continues with Centaur-based structures, and reaches a 120 t
dual propellant contain ment which has an annual ﬂow through of
300 t. Nevertheless, gas hydrogen created due to boil-off can be
reused as well as monopropellant for station keeping and other
purposes. The depots could serve multiple purposes, such as Moon
exploration and crewed Mars missions, and be refueled from the
Moon surface once in situ resources utilization (ISRU) capacities are
available.
In their 2011 paper, Smithermann and Woodcock5 provide detailed
information for eight reference missions:
1. Geo-synchronous orbit satellite servicing
2. Crew transfer vehicle (CTV) between LEO depot and EML1 depot
3. Lunar lander
4. Reusable upper stage (RUS) cargo
5. Earth-Sun Lagrange point 2 mission using the RUS, CTV, and a Deep
Space Habitat (DSH)
6. Mars orbital depot delivery
7. Crew mission to Mars orbit
8. Semi-cycler crew mission to Mars orbit
Their study presents extended tables for these reference missions:△V,
speciﬁc impulse, mass ratio, prope llant mass, hardware mass, and
remaining mass.
In 2016, Perrin and Casler19 sought to determine the optimum archi-
tecture for a fuel depot supplied from lunar assets. Their study concluded
that EML1 is the best location for an orbiting depot. The design reference
missions are commercial satellite s ervicing mission (CSS), Mars cargo
mission (MC), and propellant delivery mission. △V requirements and
time-of-ﬂight calculations are presented based on two-body orbital
mechanics. Depot locations are LEO, GEO, and EML1. The boil-off con-
sideration requires knowledge of the heatﬂuxes at different locations. Some
numbers are compiled in Table2.
At y p i c a ls t o r a g et i m eo ff u e l sw i l lb eo ft h eo r d e ro fm o n t h s20 or even
years6. The tank itself might undergo different kinds of accelerations during
a complete mission, e.g. launch, ball istic phase, rendezvous, and station
keeping. Consequently, the ﬂuids within the tanks will behave differently
depending on the acceleration environment21.
The operative pressure in the tanks will be in the range of 100 to
350 kPa8,11. Prior to the transfer, the liquid inside the tank needs to be
in an appropriate thermodynamic condition. A thermodynamic
equilibrium will be achieved in long storage phases, bringing the
vapor and the liquid to saturation, even with a pressure rise due to
incoming heat ﬂuxes. A liquid at saturation will immediately start to
evaporate, if the pressure is lower ed in the transfer line and in the
receiver tank. The conditioning of propellants prior to the transfer to
the engines is currently performed by depressurization, followed by
pressurization 22. The depressurization sacri ﬁces some liquid, which
evaporates, and cools down the remaining bulk. The gas can be used
for other purposes. Pressurization can be achieved in two ways:
heterogeneous pressurization with a non-condensable gas, or auto-
geneous pressurization with the same species. A certain degree of
subcooling can be kept for a limited period of time, and enable the
transfer of liquid without vaporization due to pool or ﬂow cavitation.
Typical heat ﬂuxes towards the tank range from 1 W m2 with multi-
layer insulations (MLI) to 100 W m2 without MLI23,24. The heatﬂux leads to
the increase of the internal energy of theﬂuids (vapor and liquid) and may
cause pool boiling at inner structures, either in a subcooled or saturated state.
The surface structure of the wetted surface of the tank plays an important
role in the creation of active nucleation sites, at which boiling will occur.
Upper stage tanks are built from aluminum25. The topology and the che-
mical composition of the internal solidsurfaces decide the wall superheat,
which is required to trigger the generation of a bubble germ. Heatﬂuxes do
not enter evenly, as outlined by ref.26.
The typical operation phases of a depot are storage, conditioning,
maneuvers, and transfer. Several dominating physical phenomena can be
associated with each phase. The understanding and the capability to model
and simulate these phenomena is necessary to enable and improve technical
solutions. We have compiled the main operation phases and their effects on
the ﬂuid systems in Table 3. In addition, a simple sketch shown in Fig. 1
visualizes the most important features of a propellant depot in space. The
paper is organized along these lines, and more details will be reported in the
following sections, based on the current state of the art.
Table 2 | Summary of features for different depot locations from 19
Location Total propellant mass kg Heat ﬂux Wm2 Boil-off rate kg h 1 chill-down mass kg/transfer
LEO 434696 2162 0.02 to 0.20 5.6
GEO 212696 1388 0.01 to 0.13 5.6
EML1 204871 1367 0.01 to 0.12 5.6
The total propellant mass is based on fueling the commercial satellite servicing mission (CSS) vehicle and the Mars cargo mission (MC) vehicle every 6 months. The heat ﬂux comes from the sun and the
albedo of the Earth. The boil-off rates and chill-down masses are for hydrogen only.
Table 3 | Operation phases (OP), effects, and associated
physical phenomena (APP)
OP Effect APP
Storage Near saturation conditions Boiling caused
by superheated wall
microzone physics
Conditioning Pressure variations Bulk cavitation
Bubble growth,
shrinkage, and collapse
Maneuvers Dynamic interaction between Gas/liquid interface position
ﬂuid and structure Liquid sloshing
Transfer Pressure drop Gas/liquid interface position
in tanks and lines Phase separation
Cavitation
Line chill down Flow boiling
Heat transfer modes
Interaction supply/receiver Dynamic models
tank liquid transfer
Receiver tank ﬁlling Interface stability
Vented or no-vent ﬁlling
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 3

Technological demonstrator
The technological demonstrators presented in this review mainly have the
purpose to demonstrate that a system or a subsystem works in relevant
conditions. NASA has considered that,among others, propulsion systems
utilizing cryogenics are necessary for achieving future long-duration mis-
sions beyond the moon11,13. Launchers with cryogenic propellants have been
used for decades with the mission of sending satellites into low Earth orbit or
to re-supply the international space station. For this reason, technologies
exist for cryogenicﬂuid management and storage, which, nevertheless, was
intended to allow its use for a few hours: the state of the art for cryogenic
storage is 14 h20. In order to enable human missions to Mars, the require-
ment is to store cryogenic fuels for months or possibly years20.M o r e o v e r ,
cryogenic liquids are highly susceptible to phase change resulting from even
minute changes in pressure and temperature. Since cryogenic liquids tend to
vaporize at common testing conditions, the measurement of theirﬂow rate
is compromised by the difﬁculty in quantifying theﬂuid quality (Percentage
of gas mass with regard to the total mass). In theﬁeld of propulsion, this can
present itself as a serious impediment to reliable engine performance, as
predictable and repeatable propellant ﬂow rates are required to ensure
proper combustion and resulting thrust27.
Many propellant depot technological demonstrators have been
attempted without reaching space 28–31.I ns o m ec a s e s ,t h et e c h n o l o g y
reached space, but the failure of somesystems did not allow to retrieve the
expected results. This is the case of Sloshsat-Flevo32–34, a spacecraft for the
experimental study of liquid dynamics and liquid management problems in
space, launched in GTO in February 2005. The tank instrumentation did not
respond after being on-orbit, but some qualitative results about the dynamic
response of the sloshing ﬂuid mass could be retrieved from the satellite
control instrumentation.
The study of cryogenic management in microgravity has an impact on
different technologies, such as Propellant Management Devices (PMD),
Zero Boil-Off tanks (ZBO), Vapor Cooling Systems (VCS), Thermo-
dynamic Vent Systems (TVS), Filling Operations (FO), Propellant Chill-
Down (PTCD), Transfer Operations (TO), and Heterogeneous/Auto-
genous Pressurization (HP/AP) 20. Several representative technology
demonstrators for space propellant systems reported in the literature are
summarized in Table4.
The ﬁrst documented experiments of propellant management devices
operating with liquid hydrogen in a compensated gravity environment were
performed in 1962 35–37. Flachbart et al. 38 evaluate the effects of helium
pressurant on the performance of a s pray-bar TVS to demonstrate the
capability of pressure control for liquid hydrogen. A thermodynamic
cryogen subcooler has been proposed by ref.39,b yr e m o v i n ge n e r g yf r o mt h e
cryogenic propellant through isobaric subcooling of the cryogen below its
normal boiling point prior to launch.This simple technique can extend the
operational life (factor of 2) of a spacecraft or an orbital cryogenic depot for
months with minimal mass penalty. A comparison between venting and
non-venting cryogenic storage tanks has been performed by ref. 40 for a
180 L cryogenic cylinder with vertical injection at on-ground conditions.
They analysed theﬂuid and wall temperature distribution for both conﬁg-
urations and reported that two pressure regions occur during ventedﬁlling:
pressure rise and gradual decrease. The observed regions during no-vented
ﬁll are pressure rise, gradual balance, and sharp pressure increase. Liquid
hydrogen tank rapid chill and ﬁll of a ﬂight volume tank testing were
performed on the ground by ref.41. They found that the tank structure chill-
down process was slow due to ﬂow boiling developed at the walls, which
changed the heat transfer coef ﬁcient. No-vented ﬁll operation did not
succeed. Nevertheless, as buoyancy inhibits the vapor ﬁlm formation, the
authors suggest that on-orbitﬁlling would promote the creation of the vapor
layer at the wall, increasing the ef ﬁciency of the cool-down process. Pro-
pellant management devices (PMD) for cryogenic liquids were tested in
compensated gravity conditions (TEXUS 48 Sounding Rocket) using liquid
nitrogen by Behruzi et al. 42. Different operations were tested: draining,
reﬁlling, heating, and depressurization. A successful operation could be
demonstrated. The ﬁrst liquid hydrogen microgravity experiment per-
formed in Europe was presented by ref. 43.T h e ye m b a r k e do nam o d u l e
containing a cryogenic cell on a sounding rocket at SSC with two tanks of 2 L
and 20 L of liquid/gas hydrogen, fully instrumented by temperature, pres-
sure, and level sensors. High-speed cameras were placed to observe the
behavior inside the tanks. The main objective for the mission was to study
the behavior of liquid hydrogen under controlled gravity conditions, created
by a cold gas thrust module. This experiment was conducted to support the
development of liquid propellant management systems for the Ariane
launcher. The use of active cooling systems such as cryocoolers eliminates
boil-off for tanks ﬁlled with liquid oxygen, as demonstrated by ref. 44.
Nevertheless, signiﬁcant work still needs to be done on cryocooler inte-
gration for on-orbit tanks, especially for liquid hydrogen. The boilingﬂow of
cryogenic nitrogen in complicated channels under low-gravity condition
was realized with the sounding rocket’s suborbital ballisticﬂight by JAXA
and the University of Tokyo45,46. The transition of ﬂow regimes from gas-
liquid two-phaseﬂow to liquid mono-phaseﬂow was visualized. Compared
with the corresponding ground test, it was con ﬁrmed that the two-phase
ﬂow in the complex channel could wet theheat transfer surfaces more easily
due to the absence of gravity, and th at a more uniform chill-down effect
could been obtained. Kassemi et al.47 proposed an experimental and CFD
comparison for three different experimental databases on self-
pressurization (AP) at Earth gravity and microgravity. The three data-
bases come from the ZBOT experimentat normal and compensated gravity
Fig. 1 | Scheme of operations for an orbiting depot
and associated physical phenomena. The three
operations represented are ballistic phase, docking
and transfer. For each phase the most typical phy-
sical phenomena occurring is represented: in green
the phenomena dominated by a variation in pres-
sure, in red those dominated by a variation in tem-
perature and in yellow those dominated by a
variation of velocity.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 4

conditions (ISS) performed with perﬂuoro-n-pentane (PnP), the ground
K-site tank experiment performed w ith liquid hydrogen, and the TPCE
(Tank Pressure Control Experiment) experiment on the Space Shuttle,
performed with Freon-113. The authors conclude that when measurements
are taken under tight experimental control and known boundary condi-
tions, the agreement with two-phase CFD results is good (for both large and
small Bond number regimes), even though these models often use semi-
empirical coefﬁcients, such as the accommodation coef ﬁcient. A quite
unique technological demonstrator for the storage and transfer of liquid
methane was developed by ref.48: the Robotic Refueling Mission 3 (RRM3).
This mission extends RRM1 and RRM2, which demonstrated satellite
refueling operations in a platform installed outside the ISS. As cryogenics
cannot be handled inside the ISS fo r safety reasons, RRM3 is operated
outside the ISS. Several operations have been demonstrated, among which
was a four months zero boil-off methane storage by means of a cryocooler.
Unfortunately, a problem during on-orbit venting expelled all methane
prior to the transfer demonstration.
Gaps in physical knowledge
I nt h ep r e v i o u ss e c t i o n ,w eh a v es e en what the perspectives of deep space
exploration are and what is achieved with technological demonstrator. In
this section, we summarize the state ofthe art on gaps in physical knowledge
identiﬁed as enablers for the required operations (see Table 3). The
demonstrators attempt to advance technologies, based on engineering
assumptions and correlations. However, the data collected from technology
demonstrators are difﬁcult to be exploited for physical modeling necessary
to master complex thermo-ﬂuid-dynamic systems. Simpliﬁed experiments
under controlled boundary conditions are required in a relevant gravita-
tional environment to advance reliable modeling.
A typical fuel depot mission implies several operational phases: three of
them are schematically reported in Fig. 1 with the associated physical
phenomena that could appear. Theﬁgure is not meant to be exhaustive but
is a graphical reference to highlight the main gaps in physical knowledge that
need to be managed in the context of fuel depot missions. Speciﬁcally, the
main highlighted phases are:
1. Ballistic phase during which the depot, full of fuel, is in its orbit. The
ﬂuid is at rest and in saturation conditions. Heatﬂuxes can induce pool
boiling, meaning bubble growth induced by the superheated condi-
tions of the tank wall. Tank depressurization for thermal control can
induce pool cavitation, meaning bubble growth by superheated liquid
in the presence of vapor germs. The control of these physical phe-
nomena is important for the conditioning and storage of cryo-
genic ﬂuids.
2. Maneuverswith the purpose of attitude control or docking during the
rendezvous between the depot and the receiver tank might cause
accelerations applied on the ﬂuid resulting in sloshing phenomena.
Sloshing, not only affects the trajectory and positioning of the vehicle,
but promotes thermal mixing, de-strati ﬁcation, condensation, and
evaporation phenomena.
3. The ﬁnal phase is thetransferof the propellant from the depot towards
the receiver tank. The transfer wi ll be affected both by temperature
overheating and depressurization of the ﬂow, which could induce
convective boiling and hydrodynamic cavitation.
The gaps in physical knowledge considered here are grouped based on
the operation they contribute to in a s pace depot system: conditioning,
storage, maneuvers, and transfer. Because conditioning and storage is
associated with phase change phenomena due to temperature and pressure
variations, they are grouped in a single section.
Conditioning and storage
For long-duration missions, the inevitably incoming thermal energy (e.g.,
due to radiation) and the different gravitational levels result in complex
multiphase conﬁgurations26. After longer times, for example, during long-
coasting phases, the liquid propellantreaches saturation conditions. Small
Table 4 | Technology demonstrators for cryogenic tanks
Reference Investigation Technol. Gravity Conditions Fluids Highlights
Early tests35– 37 Liquid hydrogen behavior in compensated gravity PMD Suborbital ﬂights Hydrogen First series of hydrogen tests on sounding rocket experiment, 4 ﬂights.
Flachbart et al.38 Effect of helium pressurant on TVS performance with
liquid hydrogen
TVS HP Ground Liquid hydrogen, gaseous
helium
Thermal energy removal from the ullage by spray.
Mustaﬁ et al.39 Design of an isobaric subcooling system PTCD Ground Hydrogen, oxygen Subcool the liquid prior to launch. Conceptual design proposed. Not an of ﬁcial
demonstrator yet.
Wang et al.40 Comparison of ﬁlling pressure and temperature in ven-
ted and non-vented cryogenic tanks
TVS FO Ground Nitrogen Thermodynamic state of vented and no-vented ﬁlls is different, so correlation
should be developed.
Flachbart et al.41 Liquid hydrogen tank rapid chill and ﬁll testing PTCD FO Ground Hydrogen Tank structure chill-down process was slow. No-vent ﬁll operation did not
succeed.
Behruzi et al.42 PMDs usable for upper stages tested with liquid
nitrogen
PMD Suborbital ﬂight Nitrogen Results are applicable to the real scale (size and ﬂuids) PMDs based on the used
scaling laws.
Leudiere et al.43 Liquid hydrogen behavior in compensated gravity PMD Suborbital ﬂights Hydrogen First European hydrogen experiment in a sounding rocket, conducted by industry.
Plachta et al.44 Zero Boil-Off test for oxygen tank ZBO Ground Oxygen Active cooling system for oxygen eliminated boil-off and robust controlled tank
pressure.
Sarae et al.45, Kinefuchi
et al.46
Chill-down process in a complex channel PTCD Suborbital Flight LN2 The transition of ﬂow regimes from gas-liquid two-phase ﬂow to liquid mono-
phase ﬂow was visualized.
Kassemi et al.47 Comparison of CFD and experimental data from 3 dif-
ferent datasets of self-pressurization
HP Ground, ISS, Space
Shuttle
Hydrogen, PnP,
Freon-113
Only experimental controlled and known boundary conditions allow a good
agreement with experiments and CFD of two-phase systems.
Breon et al.48 Storage and transfer of a cryogenic fuel on orbit ZBO TO HP/
AP TVS
Ground, ISS Nitrogen, Argon, Methane 4 months Zero Boil-Off methane storage by a cryocooler. Problem during on-orbit
venting expelled all methane prior to transfer demonstration.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 5

overheats from the solid walls may lead topool boiling. Small superheats due
to depressurization may lead to pool cavitation. Both effects lead to the
formation and the growth of bubbles (see Fig. 1)49. After long-coasting
phases and prior to liquid transfer, the saturatedﬂuid needs to be subcooled
to avoidﬂow cavitation during transfer orre-ignition of the engine. Efﬁcient
cryocoolers are not available in the case of liquid hydrogen. Therefore, the
cooling of liquid hydrogen is currently performed by pressure variation
cycles22. This tank propellant conditioning process involves depressuriza-
tion followed by re-pressurization. Thedepressurization phase will remove
thermal energy from the saturated liquid phase (pool cavitation in Fig. 1)
and evaporate a part of the liquid, which leads to superheated conditions.
Nucleated bubbles might appear and grow at this phase50. Without buoy-
ancy in microgravity conditions, the bubbles are expected to increase in size
and remain near the wall, thus affecting the wall heat transfer26. Successively,
a re-pressurization of the system is required for transfer operations. This re-
pressurization will induce vapor condensation. Bubbles eventually shrink or
collapse, which releases heat that causes a temperature of the liquid sur-
rounding the bubbles. Vapor-accumulating regions could be created,
resulting in undesired thermal conditions and producing issues in the
propellant removal. Moreover, the phenomena could be coupled with
boiling induced by thermal superheat26. These complex multiphase phe-
nomena, including phase changes induced by pressure and temperature
variations in microgravity conditions, are challenging to investigate
experimentally and model11.
Validating different CFD and nodal tools with microgravity data is
necessary to routinely design in-space cryogenic systems, especially with the
ﬂuid dynamics and heat transfer being tightly coupled as in two-phase
cryogenic systems20. One of the main difﬁculties arises because of the multi-
scale nature of the problem. The thermal characterization at the tank scale
(meter scale) is impacted by these phase change phenomena arising at the
bubble scale (milli-meter scale)49. Moreover, the phase change is driven by
the thermal boundary layer at the interface and/or by phenomena arising in
the microregion and microlayers in the contact line region, which may be of
particular importance for cryogenicﬂuids that are perfectly wettable (nano-
meter to micrometer scale). On top of that, the simulation of bubble cavi-
tation, that is induced by a pressure drop, requires the use of a fully com-
pressible or a suitable variable de nsity approach and the coupling with
accurate thermodynamic descriptions of both phases and of the saturation
conditions at the interface.
Understanding the effect of the above-mentioned phenomena is of
primary importance for tank thermal control. Studies devoted to phase
change phenomena in microgravity have already been realized. Never-
theless, few of them have been devoted to phase change phenomena of
cryogenics in microgravity, while most of them have been performed at
terrestrial gravity conditions. In Table 5 the most relevant experimental
studies regarding phase change p henomena in cryogenics and/or in
microgravity have been collected, presenting brieﬂy the kind of investiga-
tion, the gravity conditions or platform, the kind of liquid used, and with
some highlights of the results and conclusions. The summary of gaps in
physical knowledge and their applic ation for conditioning and storage
operations is show in Table6.
Maneuvers
Liquids embarked in vehicles react to external accelerations, hence man-
euvers, depending on the different kinds of liquid/gas involved and the
geometry of the container. Such movement is called sloshing. All sorts of
maneuvers on a space depot might promote a sloshing appearance: station-
keeping, rendezvous, docking, de-o rbiting, spinning satellites, ﬂat-spin
transition, landing, in-orbit refueling, and other fast orbital maneuvers. In all
these phases, the dynamics of the spacecraft interacts with the dynamics of
the ﬂuid: the movement of the spacecraft excites the fuel in the tanks, that
exerts forces and moments on the container. The container transmits these
disturbing forces/moments to the main body, in some cases causing
structural damages and/or stability/performance loss. In non-isothermal
systems, especially those using cryogenic propellants, the free surface
movement gets thermodynamic mixing between phases. The thermo-
dynamic mixing can cause undesired pressure ﬂuctuations, which might
disrupt the fuel feeding to the engine or create structural damages. During
ballistic phases in space, when accele ration forces are reduced, surface
tension forces dominate the dynamics of the liquid51: capillary and residual
gravitational potential energies tend tominimize and the gas/liquid interface
assumes the position of the minimum free surface energy52,53. The effect of
external excitation on the dynamic of liquids in microgravity results thus
different than the same liquid in norm al gravity conditions (on Earth or
under a constant acceleratedﬁeld). Known cases of the effect of sloshing in
space are reported in the literature: Hoffman et al.54 estimated that sloshing
was the principal cause of the inef ﬁcient or apparently ineffective
momentum damping observed on the occasion of the anomaly of the Near
Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission. Sloshing is also suspected to
be the cause of the instability of the upper stage that brought the loss of the
Falcon 1 mission in 200755.
Sloshing mitigation can be realized by means of passive or active
solutions. Passive solutions consist of baf ﬂes and bladders 56,57 which are
traditionally designed to reduce the i mpact of sloshing force/torques. A
historical application of an anti-sloshing device is found in the ESA Auto-
mated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) project58. These devices have the advantage
to increase the sloshing frequency and reduce the sloshing amplitude51.I n
the attitude control bandwidth, the resonance introduced by the pertur-
bation appears at low frequencies, requiring to move the frequency of the
sloshing modes to higher ranges. However, this increase of resonance fre-
quency might fall in the spacecraft structure ﬂexible modes having dis-
rupting consequences for guidance and control performances 52,59.
Table 5 | Experimental studies on thermodynamic characterization of ﬂuid systems in microgravity
Reference Investigation Gravity
Condition
Fluids Highlights
Bellur
et al.119,120
Condensation and evaporation in cryogenics with
optical techniques
Ground Hydrogen,
Methane
Techniques are developed and applied for the characterization of phase
change rates with changing temperature and pressure conditions.
Flash and
splash121– 124
Bubble dynamics in isothermal cavitation Parabolic
Flight
Water Dynamic of bubbles in water cavitation has been studied in microgravity.
Studies included: cavitation in drops, plasma-generated bubbles, strong
collapse, shock wave formations and luminescence.
RUBI125– 127 The experiment addresses fundamental ques-
tions about two-phase heat transfer during boiling
processes
ISS FC-72 Creation of bubbles on heated substrates by the short laser pulse. Contact line
behavior on single bubbles. Multiple bubbles study. Bubble growth has been
studied as: undisturbed growth, in ﬂuenced by shear ﬂow, inﬂuenced by
electric ﬁeld.
Source I89 Dual species system behavior in a compensated
gravity environment
Suborbital
ﬂight
HFE-7000,
Gaseous
nitrogen
Free surface behavior, in ﬂuence of temperature gradients on thermocapillary
ﬂows, heat transfer enhancement
Source II88 Single species system behavior in a compensated
gravity environment
Suborbital
ﬂight
HFE-7000 Free surface behavior, the in ﬂuence of evaporation on apparent contact angle
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 6

Nevertheless, the introduction of supplementary structural elements into
the design increases the system’s overall mass as well as the mission costs.
Active solutions might either act directly on the guidance and control
(GNC) reference of the mission or to introduce actuators directly in cor-
respondence with the disturbance s ource in order to actively damp the
system. However, smoother angular velocity proﬁles and bigger tranqui-
lizing times after aggressive maneuvers,respectively, cause loss of agility and
available mission time window, whileno active solutions are designed and
tested in space applications to the author’sk n o w l e d g ei no r d e rt om i t i g a t e
the sloshing phenomenon.
High-ﬁdelity CFD simulations can, to some extent, accurately
represent sloshing phenomena in microgravity conditions. Never-
theless, integration of CFD tools with GNC algorithms often brings
complicated analysis due to the numerical noise introduced in the
system by CFD outputs 58. Furthermore, the huge computational time
t a k e nb yC F Ds i m u l a t i o n sm a k e sG N Cc e r t iﬁcation (large number of
validations for different scenario s, Monte Carlo analyses to cover
system uncertainties) extremely ch allenging and incompatible with
the industry ’s deadlines. The widespread practice is to model sloshing
phenomena as an equivalent mechanical system that acts like
structural ﬂexible modes 60. Two simple linear models are commonly
used: the mass-spring-damper model is able to represent the linear
lateral sloshing; on the other hand the equivalent pendulum model
has the main advantage to adapt the frequency mode in function of
the acceleration. However, bot h these linear models have good
accuracy for small amplitude liquid sloshing and axisymmetric
tanks61–64. The biggest drawback is that these models do not take into
account the dependency of the sloshing phenomena by the velocity
and acceleration of the spacecra ft that provokes non-negligible
inertial forces/torques on the liquid 65. More advanced studies,
including non-linearities, were conducted by several
authors52,58,59,66–71.
Most of the equivalent mechanical models52,72–74 present the difﬁculty
to identify its constitutive parameters (e.g., liquid friction force and torque)
by a semi-empirical approach. Pioneering work on the sloshing control are
proposed by the following references:65,75–77.
Nevertheless, for model validation of the control approach, experi-
ments are fundamentals. The research activity driven by Airbus DS in
Bremen70,78 has to be considered pioneering in this direction: an experiment
was conceived in order to study a way to control the sloshing of upper stages
of launchers in the long-coasting phase by using a hexapode sloshing sys-
tem. The main limit of these tests is that the experiment is driven in a normal
gravity environment. Experiments relevant to microgravity conditions are
difﬁcult. Drop towers providing short time microgravity periods (about 9 s)
and parabolicﬂights, having a high disturbing noise on accelerations, do not
allow testing of the control strategy. The main space missions which pro-
vided a step forward in the analysis of sloshing in microgravity are reported
in Table 7.
A last mention is given to the interaction of sloshing with the ther-
modynamic system. The literature on this topic is divided into two major
sets of research campaigns: ground-based and microgravity. While the
ground-based campaigns cannot achieve dynamical similarity with the
microgravity environment, several studies, such as references79–84,h a v eb u i l t
essential foundational knowledge on the physics of the problem. These
campaigns characterized the thermodynamic response of partially ﬁlled
tanks under different sloshing excitations, working ﬂuids, pressurization
techniques, pressurant gasses, and tank designs (e.g., with or without baf-
ﬂes). The state of the art on microgravity experiments has been mainly
Table 6 | Summary table of gaps in physical knowledge and their application for conditioning and storage
Physical knowledge’s gap Application
Heat transfer coef ﬁcients with different phases (gas/liquid, liquid/solid, gas/solid), different conditions (e.g.,
gravity conditions, interfaces conditions), and different concurring mechanisms (e.g., natural convection,
thermocapillary convection, etc.)
Thermal control, zero boil-off, mixing, system readiness
for next status.
Creation of bubbles due to heat input or depressurization, with and without ﬂow Thermal control by means of depressurization/pressur-
ization, zero boil-off
Critical heat ﬂux (CHF) curve in relevant acceleration environments Thermal control, tank ﬁlling
Mass transfer rates due to phase change Thermal control, tank ﬁlling, autogenous pressurization
Mass transfer rates due to species concentration (effect of non-condensable gas) Heterogeneous pressurization
Identiﬁcation of interaction between the different scales in time and space of problems Ef ﬁcient, accurate and representative CFD simulations
Table 7 | Experimental studies on sloshing in microgravity
Reference Investigation Gravity
Cond.
Fluids Highlights
SloshSat-
FLEVO
(ESA)68,128
Launched on 12 February 2005 to study sloshing in a tank subjected to
induced perturbations with a system of 12 nitrogen gas thrusters.
On-
orbit
GTO
Water The mission operated for 8 days. Communication problems
hampered the quality and quantity of data collected. Thanks to
this mission COMFLO solver (University of Germany) 129 was
improved and validated.
SPHERES-
Slosh (NASA)
Two free-ﬂying satellites known as Synchronized Position Hold, Engage,
Reorient, Experimental Satellites (SPHERES) are attached to opposite
ends of a metal frame holding a plastic tank with green-colored water.
ISS Water The data were used to re ﬁne critical computer models to better
solve launch and spacecraft fuel slosh. A synchronization pro-
blem between the SPHERES and the camera acquiring the
sloshing images results in a limited validation use of the data 130.
SPHERES
thether-slosh
(NASA)131
Experimental test-bench to study automated strategies for steering
passive cargo. It consists of two automated satellites (SPHERES) con-
nected to two different tanks: a liquid- ﬁlled tank and a solid tank of
same mass.
ISS Water The evaluation of how the ﬂuid and solid tanks affected the
closed-loop control of the tethered system can inform future
development of control strategies. The results appear to indi-
cate the correct application of control effort to reach closed-
loop set points.
FLUIDICS
(ESA)132,133
Experimental test-bench to validate the Direct Numerical Simulation for
two-phase ﬂow with the realﬂuid’s behavior within a spherical tank under
microgravity conditions.
ISS Water Excellent agreement between experimental results and simu-
lation with DIVA ® (Dynamics of Interface for Vaporization and
Atomization). Control of sloshing was not a goal of this mission.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 7

derived from drop tower experiments (5 s of microgravity) 85–87,a n d
sounding rocket ﬂights (6 min of microgravity) 88,89 campaigns. In such
experiments, the gas-liquid interface retains a stable shape with a rising
contact line along the walls, and periodic oscillations of its center along the
axial direction. Although these conditions allow for detailed investigations
of heat and mass transfer in a microgravity environment, the stable shape of
the free surface does not account for more complex free surface behavior
which might be encountered in long ballistic period and thruster excitations.
The summary of gaps in physical knowledge and their application for
m a n e u v e r si ss h o wi nT a b l e8.
Transfer
The transfer of fuel from a supply tank to a receiver tank involves several
major phenomena: the chill-down of the line and the creation of different
ﬂow regimes, depending on the temperature and pressure conditions of the
line, ﬂuid-hammer effects, and depressurization of the supply tank. Starting
from the situation in which the supply tank is properly conditioned, transfer
can start. When the cryogenic ﬂuid enters the pipe, evaporation occurs
immediately, and the ﬂow during the chill-down phase becomes a two-
phase ﬂow. The topology of such a ﬂow has a strong impact on the heat
transfer and the pressure drop along the channel. Therefore, generally, the
ﬁrst step in two-phaseﬂow experiments, or models, is to determine the two-
phase ﬂow regime, which is dependent on many factors, such as ﬂuid
velocity,ﬂuid density,ﬂuid quality, gravity, and pipe size. At Earth gravity,
for horizontalﬂow, theﬂow regime is visually classiﬁed as bubblyﬂow, plug
ﬂow, stratiﬁed ﬂow, wavy ﬂow, slug ﬂow, and annular ﬂow90.F o rv e r t i c a l
ﬂow, the ﬂow regimes include bubbly ﬂow, slug ﬂow, churn ﬂow, and
annularﬂow91. The only difference between the horizontal and verticalﬂows
is the effect of gravity that causes the horizontal ﬂow to become non-
symmetrical to the tube centerline .R e g i m e so fc o m m o nt w o - p h a s eﬂow
such as air–water have been extensively mapped from experiments. How-
ever, the published data for cryogens are limited 92–94.T h ei n ﬂuence of
microgravity on the chill-down process has to be taken into account. Indeed,
in microgravity the two-phase ﬂow patterns and the heat transfer char-
acteristics should be the same, whatever the orientation of the pipe, and the
ﬂow should be not stratiﬁed95. The difference in density and inertia under
terrestrial conditions has an impact on the pipe ﬂow distribution: the two
phases are usually non-uniformly distributed across the pipe. The absence of
gravity impacts theﬂow regimes, the pressure drop, and the heat transfer. In
space, the effect of surface tension fo rces and surface phenomena is sup-
posed to be more important than on Earth93,96. First modeling efforts of chill
down based on one-dimensional de scriptions were carried out in the
sixties97,98. These one-dimensional models provided simple, but acceptable
estimations of the chill downtime (the time required to achieve steady-state
cryogenicﬂow). However, they neglected the transient characteristic of the
chill down, the inﬂuence of theﬂow regimes and, in most cases, the inﬂuence
of the heat transfer regimes. Last but not least, no estimation of the
instantaneous wall and bulkﬂuid temperature was possible.
During cryogenic chill down, the pipe wall is in contact either with the
liquid or with the vapor: the characterization of liquid/solid heat transfer is
much more complex than the one of gas/liquid due to the occurrence of
different phenomena. Indeed, when the cold liquid startsﬂowing in the pipe
Table 8 | Summary table of gaps in physical knowledge and their application for maneuvers
Physical knowledge’s gap Application
Liquid motion with free surfaces (often referred to as sloshing) at different acceleration
regimes caused by any kind of excitation or environmental conditions.
GNC (long-coasting dynamic control, accurate positioning), reduce overde-
sign weight, tank (re)- ﬁlling, fuel transfer towards the engine.
Inertia-induced liquid jets (Geysering) Tank ﬁlling, optimize settling maneuvers
Two-phase distribution Mass gauging, liquid-only removal, gas-only removal, droplet injection for
cooling
Table 9 | Experimental studies on cryogenic chill-down
Reference Investigation Gravity
Cond.
Fluids Highlights
Velat92 Experimental investigation to collect detailed information on ﬂow
structure, ﬂow properties, and heat transfer mechanisms asso-
ciated with cryogenic chill-down.
1g Liquid
nitrogen
Visualizations of the entire chill-down process are documented
among a range of mass ﬂuxes. The existence and magnitude of cir-
cumferential and small axial temperature gradients in the transfer line
during the various phases of chill-down is reported.
Hu et al. 134 Liquid nitrogen chill-down rates and ﬂow patterns between
upward ﬂow and downward ﬂow in a vertical pipe.
1g Liquid
nitrogen
Increasing mass ﬂow rate, rewetting temperature, and quench front
velocity increase while the critical heat ﬂux decreases. The total chill-
down time for upward ﬂow is longer than for downward ﬂow. Critical
heat ﬂux, heat transfer coef ﬁcient, and the quench front velocity are
higher for upward ﬂow.
Rame and
Hartwig135
Liquid hydrogen chill-down is experimentally studied for con-
tinuous and pulsed ﬂow conditions
1g Liquid
nitrogen
The authors propose a connection between the non-monotonically
decreasing temperature and the ﬂow conditions, which increase the
heat transfer coef ﬁcient.
Yuan
et al.93,96
Liquid nitrogen chill-down process under both normal gravity and
microgravity conditions
0g,
drop
tower
Liquid
nitrogen
The bottom wall heat ﬂux is lower in 0g than in 1g. Wall temperature
and inlet ﬂow rate do depend on gravity.
Kawanami
et al.101
Liquid nitrogen forced convective boiling for low mass velocity in
terrestrial and microgravity conditions
1g, 0g Liquid
nitrogen
Heat transfer and quench front velocity is 20% higher in 0g. Gravity
has no effect on the maximum heat ﬂux, which increases exponen-
tially with the quench front velocity.
Hartwig
et al.136
Chill-down in microgravity using pulse ﬂow and low-thermally
conductive coatings
Parabolic
Flight
Liquid
nitrogen
The tested combination of coatings and pulsating ﬂow enhances
signiﬁcantly the performances of the chill-down: 75% reduction of
mass consumption.
Sarae
et al.45
See Table 4.
Kinefuchi
et al.46
See Table 4.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 8

and chill-down occurs, the heat transfer regimes observed areﬁlm boiling,
transition boiling (which is often neglected), nucleate boiling, and con-
vective heat transfer. The transitionfrom one regime to another depends on
several parameters: wall heatﬂux, ﬂuid properties, and wall temperature. If
the wall temperature is higher than the Leidenfrost temperature,ﬁlm boiling
is assumed to occur; if the temperatu re is between the Leidenfrost tem-
perature and the transition one, the nucleate boiling regime is considered as
the actual state of the ﬂow99.
Recent activities are mainly focused on the deﬁnition of chill-downﬂow
regimes and related heat transfer characteristics, to be able to correctly
describe the phenomena and to developadequate models for prediction. A
l a r g ea m o u n to fw o r ki sd o n eo ng r o u n d ,b u tc h i l l - d o w ni nd e p o t so c c u r si n
microgravity conditions. Some activities include test-bench and experiments
to reproduce microgravity conditions96,100,101. Chill-down process optimiza-
tion is also a promising ﬁeld of investigation, which aim at continuously
improving the efﬁciency of cryogenicﬂuid applications. These two research
activities are developed complementary with the common goal of reaching a
comprehensive capability of chill-down management. Liquid nitrogen is
often selected as a working ﬂuid because, even if its thermophysical prop-
erties do not represent liquid hydrogen and oxygen perfectly, it is aﬁrst step
towards thermodynamic similarity and an experimental cryogenic envir-
onment with respect to using classic laboratory ﬂu i d s ,e . g .a l c o h o l s .T h e
scientiﬁc works related to chill-down, selected in Table 9,a r eo r i e n t e dt o
applications such as cryogenic enginesand propellant storage stations (used
for spacecraft supply). Finally, ano ther phenomenon of relevance in a
transfer line is the so-calledﬂuid-hammer102–104. The complex interaction of
the ﬂow ﬁeld and liquid-vapor phase transitions, developing of boiling and
condensation in the line due to pressureﬂuctuation, generates instabilities.
The feature of such phenomena involves the slow propagation of pressure
ﬂuctuations in two-phase regions, vapor accumulated downstream at war-
mer pipe sections, and vapor bubbles coalescence105–107.M e c h a n i c a lv i b r a -
tions can play a role in interacting withlow-frequency pressure disturbances.
I ft h et h e r m a l - h y d r o d y n a m i cd i s t urbances generate large-amplitudeﬂow
oscillations and hydraulic shocks (ﬂuid-hammer), a loss of thermal- ﬂow
control and mechanical damages might occur108. While several investiga-
tions have been performed to study cryogenic ﬂuid-hammer in gravity
conditions109–111, microgravity experiments are still limited112,113.T h es u m -
mary of gaps in physical knowledge and their application forﬂuid transfer
operations is show in Table10.
Summary and outlook
Several nations strive to enlarge their horizon of exploration by extending
their presence in space, and aiming to go back to the Moon and to reach
Mars. A versatile, reliable, and efﬁcient transportation is required to enable
the presence of human beings in deep space. The most promising propul-
sion systems are based on cryogenic liquids and use hydrogen or methane as
fuel and oxygen as oxidizer. For the development of a lunar economy and for
human missions to Mars, refueling in orbit will be necessary. In this paper,
we reviewed reference missions and architectures for cryogenic depots and
analysed the fundamental operations of refueling in orbit, i.e., conditioning
and storage, maneuvers, and transfer. We summarized the physical phe-
nomena associated with these operations and described gaps in knowledge
that need to be ﬁlled in order to enable space depots. Our review is by no
means exhaustive, but aims to highlight the scientiﬁcc h a l l e n g e si nt h eﬁelds
of thermodynamics, ﬂuid dynamics, and structural mechanics, and more
importantly, their nonlinear couplings ,t h a ta r eo p e n .T h es o l u t i o nt ot h e s e
challenges would lead to new and more capable technologies. In a nutshell,
the synergies between scientiﬁc and technological exploration strategies for
deep space exploration promise to open new horizons of research.
Received: 13 December 2023; Accepted: 4 March 2024;
References
1. Olla, P. Space Technologies for the Bene ﬁt of Human Society and
Earth (Springer, 2009).
2. Hufenbach, B. et al. The global exploration roadmap. In Proc. of the
62nd International Astronautical Congress , IAC-11.B3.1.8
(International Astronautical Federation, 2011).
3. National Aeronautics and Space Administration. NASA Technology
Taxonomy 2020 (2020).
4. Minster, O., Hatton, J. P., Ngo-Anh, T. J. Roadmaps for Future
Research. A Redeﬁnition of Strategic Goals for Future Space
Research on the ISS and Supporting Research Platforms(ESA,
ESTEC, 2016).
5. Smitherman, D. & Woodcock, G. Space transportation infrastructure
supported by propellant depots. In AIAA SPACE 2011 Conference
and Exposition, AIAA 2011-7160 (AIAA, 2011).
6. Oleson, S. R. et al. Compass ﬁnal report: Nuclear electric propulsion
(NEP) - chemical vehicle 1.2. No. TM-20210017131 in Technical
Memorandum (NASA, Glenn Research Center, 2021).
7. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine. Space
Nuclear Propulsion for Human Mars Exploration (The National
Academies Press, 2021).
8. Hartwig, J. W. Liquid Acquisition Devices for Advanced In-space
Cryogenic Propulsion Systems (Elsevier Academic Press, 2016).
9. Cilliers, J., Hadler, K. & Rasera, J. Toward the utilisation of resources
in space: knowledge gaps, open questions, and priorities. npj
Microgravity 9, 22 (2023).
10. Meyer, M. et al. NASA Technology Roadmaps, TA 2: In-space
Propulsion Technologies. Tech. Rep. (2015).
11. Johnson, W. L. & Stephens, J. R. NASA ’s cryogenic ﬂuid
management technology development roadmaps. In JANNAF In-
Space Chemical Propulsion 1– 12 (JANNAF, 2018).
12. Stinner, A. & Begoray, J. Journey to Mars: the physics of travelling to
the red planet. Phys. Educ. 40, 35 (2005).
13. Chato, D. J. Cryogenic technology development for exploration
missions. In 45th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting and Exhibit
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2007-953 (2007).
14. Drake, B. G. & Watts, K. D. Human Exploration of Mars Design
Reference Architecture 5.0, Addendum 2 - NASA/SP-2009-566-
ADD2. Tech. Rep. (NASA, 2014).
15. Anonymous. NASA ’s exploration systems architecture study -
NASA-TM-2005-214062. Tech. Rep. (NASA, 2005).
Table 10 | Summary table of gaps in physical knowledge and their application for ﬂuid transfer operations
Physical knowledge’s gap Application
Liquid/Gas interfaces during transfer in all gravity conditions Tank (re)- ﬁlling, fuel in transfer lines
Heat transfer coefﬁcients with different phases (gas/liquid, liquid/solid, gas/solid), different conditions (e.g., gravity
conditions, interfaces conditions), and different concurring mechanisms (e.g., natural convection, thermocapillary
convection, etc.)
Tank (re)-ﬁlling, fuel in transfer lines
Creation of bubbles due to heat input or depressurization, with and without ﬂow Fuel in transfer lines, ﬂow control (regulation valves,
etc.), material fatigue.
Effect of gravity on the creation of bubbles (cavitation or boiling) and presence of ﬂow Fuel in transfer lines, ﬂow control (regulation valves,
etc.), material fatigue.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 9

16. Tanner, C., Young, J., Thompson, R. & Wilhite, D. A. On-orbit
propellant resupply options for mars exploration architectures. In
57th International Astronautical Congress (2006).
17. Gaebler, J. et al. Reusable lunar transportation architecture utilizing
orbital propellant depots. In AIAA SPACE 2009 Conference and
Exposition (2009).
18. Zegler, F. & Kutter, B. Evolving to a depot-based space
transportation architecture. In AIAA SPACE 2010 Conference and
Exposition (2012).
19. Perrin, T. & Casler, J. Architecture study for a fuel depot supplied
from lunar assets. In AIAA Space Forum (AIAA, 2016).
2 0 . H a n s e n ,H .C . ,J o h n s o n ,W .L . ,M e y e r ,M . ,W e r k h e i s e r ,A .&
Stephens, J. R. Cryogenic ﬂuid management technologies
enabling for the Artemis program and beyond. In ASCEND
2020 (2020).
21. Dreyer, M. et al. Propellant behavior in launcher tanks - an overview
of the compere program. In EUCASS (2009).
22. Behruzi, P., Dodd, C. & Netter, G. Future propellant management
device concepts for restartable cryogenic upper stages. In 43rd
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and
Exhibit (2007).
23. Johnson, W. R. Thermal performance of multilayer insulations.
(NTRS) 19740014451. Tech. Rep. (NASA, 1974).
24. Liu, Z., Li, Y., Xie, F. & Zhou, K. Thermal performance of foam/MLI for
cryogenic liquid hydrogen tank during the ascent and on orbit
period. Appl. Therm. Eng. 98, 430– 439 (2016).
25. Merino, J. et al. Ariane 6 - Tanks and structures for the new european
launcher. In Deutscher Luft- und Raumfahrtkongress 2017 (2017).
26. Muratov, C., Osipov, V. & Smelyanskiy, V. Issues of Long-term
Cryogenic Propellant Storage in Microgravity . NASA/TM-2011-
215988 (National Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2011).
27. Mena, J. L., Ingle, M. A., Shirsat, V. & Choudhuri, A. An investigation
of a cavitating venturi ﬂow control feature in a cryogenic propellant
delivery system. Flow. Meas. Instrum. 41,9 7– 103 (2015).
28. Schuster, J. R., Wachter, J. P. & Vento, D. M. The COLD-SAT
experiment for cryogenicﬂuid management technology. InThe 1990
JANNAF Propulsion Meeting (Johns Hopkins University, 1990).
29. Gravlee, M., Kutter, B., Wollen, M., Rhys, N. & Walls, L. CRYOTE
(cryogenic orbital testbed) concept. In AIAA SPACE 2009
Conference and Exposition (2012).
30. Gravlee, M., Kutter, B., McLean, C. & Marquardt, J. Cryogenic orbital
testbed (CRYOTE) development status. Cryogenics 52,
231– 235 (2012).
31. Meyer, M. L., Motil, S. M., Ginty, C. A. & Melis, M. E. The cryogenic
propellant storage and transfer technology demonstration mission:
progress and transition. In 50th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint
Propulsion Conference (2014).
32. Prins, J. SLOSHSAT FLEVO Facility for Liquid Experimentation and
Veriﬁcation in Orbit - NLR-TP-2000-630 . Tech. Rep. (National
Aerospace Laboratory, 2000).
33. Vreeburg, J. Measured states of SLOSHSAT FLEVO - NLR-TP-2005-
518. Tech. Rep. (National Aerospace Laboratory, 2005).
34. Prins, J. SLOSHSAT FLEVO project, ﬂight, and lessons learned. In
56th International Astronautical Congress of the International
Astronautical Federation, the International Academy of Astronautics,
and the International Institute of Space Law https://doi.org/10.2514/
6.IAC-05-B5.3.B5.5.05 (2012).
35. Knoll, R. Weightlessness Experiments with Liquid Hydrogen in
Aerobee Sounding Rockets. Tech. Rep. (NASA, 1962).
36. Mcardle, J. G., Dillon, R. C. & A., A. D. Weightlessness Experiments
with Liquid Hydrogen in Aerobee Sounding Rockets; Uniform
Radiant Heat Addition - Flight 2 . Tech. Rep. (1962).
37. Nunamaker, R. R., Corpas, E. L. & McArdle, J. G. Weightlessness
Experiments with Liquid Hydrogen in Aerobee Sounding Rockets .
Tech. Rep. (1963).
38. Flachbart, R. H., Hastings, L. J., Hedayat, A., Nelson, S. L. & Tucker,
S. Testing the effects of helium pressurant on Thermodynamic Vent
System performance with liquid hydrogen. In AIP Conference
Proceedings 1483 (American Institute of Physics, 2008).
39. Musta ﬁ, S., Canavan, E., Johnson, W., Kutter, B. & Shull, J.
Subcooling cryogenic propellants for long duration space
exploration. In AIAA Space 2009 Conference and Exposition (2009).
40. Wang, C., Li, Y. & Wang, R. Performance comparison between no-
vent and vented ﬁlls in vertical thermal-insulated cryogenic
cylinders. Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci. 35, 311– 318 (2011).
41. Flachbart, R. H. et al. Large-scale liquid hydrogen tank rapid chill and
ﬁll testing for the advanced shuttle upper stage concept. Tech. Rep.
(NASA, 2013).
42. Behruzi, P. et al. Cryogenic propellant management sounding rocket
experiments on TEXUS 48. In 49th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint
Propulsion Conference (2013).
43. Leudiere, V., Bianchi, S., Lundin, M., Andersson, G. & Loth, K.
CRYOFENIX mission - study of liquid hydrogen under low gravity. In
22nd ESA Symposium on European Rocket and Balloon
Programmes and Related Research (ESA, Place, 2015).
44. Plachta, D. W., Johnson, W. L. & Feller, J. R. Zero boil-off system
testing. Cryogenics 74,8 8– 94 (2016).
45. Sarae, W. et al. Sounding rocket experiment on chill-down process
with liquid nitrogen in a complex channel. In 51st AIAA/SAE/ASEE
Joint Propulsion Conference (2015).
46. Kinefuchi, K. et al. Investigation of cryogenic chilldown in a complex
channel under low gravity using a sounding rocket. J. Spacecr.
Rockets 56,9 1– 103 (2019).
47. Kassemi, M., Hylton, S. & Kartuzova, O. 1G and microgravity tank
self-pressurization: experiments and CFD model validations across
Ra and Bo regimes. Int. J. Microgravity Sci. Appl. 37, 370103 (2020).
48. Breon, S. R. et al. Robotic refueling mission 3-an overview. IOP Conf.
Ser. Mater. Sci. Eng. 755, 012002 (2020).
49. Urbano, A., Tanguy, S. & Colin, C. Direct numerical simulation of
nucleate boiling in zero gravity conditions. Int. J. Heat. Mass Tran.
143, 118521 (2019).
50. Brennen, C. E. Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics (Oxford Univ.
Press, 1995).
51. Ibrahim, R. A. Liquid Sloshing Dynamics: Theory and Applications
(Cambridge Univ. Press, 2005).
52. Deng, M. & Yue, B. Nonlinear model and attitude dynamics of ﬂexible
spacecraft with large amplitude slosh. Acta Astronaut. 133, 111 –
120 (2017).
53. Concus, P., Finn, R. & Weislogel, M. Capillary surfaces in an exotic
container: results from space experiments. J. Fluid Mech. 394,
119– 135 (1999).
54. Hoffman, E. J. et al. The Near Rendezvous Burn Anomaly of
december 1998. Technical report, (Applied Physics Laboratory,
Johns Hopkins University, 1999).
55. SpaceX. Falcon 1 Demo Flight 2 - Flight Review Update . Technical
report, SpaceX (2007).
56. Dodge, F. T. Engineering Study of Flexible Baf ﬂes for Slosh
Suppression. Technical report NASA CR - 1880, (NASA, 1971).
57. Tam, W., Dommer, K., Wiley, S., Mosher, L. & Persons, D. Design and
manufacture of the messenger propellant tank assembly. In 38th
AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit
4139 (2002).
58. Bayle, O. et al. In ﬂuence of the ATV propellant sloshing on the GNC
performance. In AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control
Conference and Exhibit 4845 (2002).
59. Gasbarri, P., Sabatini, M. & Pisculli, A. Dynamic modelling and
stability parametric analysis of a ﬂexible spacecraft with fuel slosh.
Acta Astronaut. 127, 141 – 159 (2016).
60. Mazzini, L. Flexible Spacecraft Dynamics, Control and Guidance
(Springer, 2015).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 10

61. Abramson, H. N. The dynamic behavior of liquids in moving
containers, with applications to space vehicle technology. Technical
report NASA SP - 106, NASA (1966).
62. Buseck, R. & Benaroya, H. Mechanical models for slosh of liquid fuel.
In Aerospace Design Conference, 1093 (1993).
63. Vreeburg, J. & Chato, D. Models for liquid impact onboard
SLOSHSAT FLEVO. In Space 2000 Conference and Exposition ,
5152 (2000).
64. Ibrahim, R. A., Pilipchuk, V. N. & Ikeda, T. Recent advances in liquid
sloshing dynamics. Appl. Mech. Rev. 54, 133– 199 (2001).
65. Bourdelle, A. et al. Propellant sloshing torque H1 -based observer
design for enhanced attitude control. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52,
286– 291 (2019).
66. Thompson, J. W. & O ’Connor, W. Wave-based attitude control of
spacecraft with fuel sloshing dynamics. Arch. Mech. Eng. 63,
263– 275 (2016).
67. Zhou, Z. & Huang, H. Constraint surface model for large amplitude
sloshing of the spacecraft with multiple tanks. Acta Astronaut. 111,
222– 229 (2015).
68. Vreeburg, J. Dynamics and control of a spacecraft with a moving
pulsating ball in a spherical cavity. Acta Astronaut. 40,
257– 274 (1997).
69. Enright, P. & Wong, E. Propellant slosh models for the Cassini
spacecraft. In Astrodynamics Conference, 3730 (1994).
70. Konopka, M. et al. Active slosh control and damping - simulation and
experiment. Acta Astronaut. 158,8 9 – 102 (2019).
71. Berry, R. L. & Tegart, J. R. Experimental study of transient liquid
motion in orbiting spacecraft. Technical report NASA CR - 144003,
NASA (1975).
72. Schlapkohl, T., Kang, J.-Y. & Coverstone, V. Analytical control law
for spacecraft reorientation via Lyapunov theory. In AIAA Guidance,
Navigation, and Control Conference , 7894 (2010).
73. Yang, D.-D., Yue, B.-Z., Wu, W.-J., Song, X.-J. & Zhu, L.-M. Attitude
maneuver of liquid-ﬁlled spacecraft with a ﬂexible appendage by
momentum wheel. Acta Mechanica Sin. 28, 543– 550 (2012).
74. Zwart, P. J., Gerber, A. G. & Belamri, T. A two-phase model for
predicting cavitation dynamics. In International Conference on
Multiphase Flow (2004).
75. Sopasakis, P., Bernardini, D., Strauch, H., Bennani, S. & Bemporad,
A. Sloshing-aware attitude control of impulsively actuated
spacecraft. In 2015 European Control Conference (ECC) ,
1376– 1381 (2015).
76. Bourdelle, A. et al. Towards new controller design oriented models of
propellant sloshing in observation spacecraft. In AIAA Scitech 2019
Forum 0115 (2019).
77. Biannic, J.-M., Bourdelle, A., Evain, H., Moreno, S. & Burlion, L. On
robust lpv-based observation of fuel slosh dynamics for attitude
control design. IFAC-PapersOnLine 52, 170– 175 (2019).
78. Jetzschmann, C., Strauch, H. & Bennani, S. Model based active
slosh damping experiment. Preprint at arXiv:1801.10017 (2018).
79. Moran, M. E., McNelis, N. B., Kudlac, M. T., Haberbusch, M. S. &
Satornino, G. A. Experimental results of hydrogen sloshing a 62
cubic foot (1750 liter) tank. In 30th Joint Propulsion Conference and
Exhibit (1994).
80. Das, S. & Hop ﬁnger, E. Mass transfer enhancement by gravity waves
at a liquid-vapour interface. Int. J. Heat. Mass Tran. 52,
1400– 1411 (2009).
81. Van Foreest, A. Modeling of cryogenic sloshing including heat
and mass transfer. In 46th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint
Propulsion Conference & Exhibit . https://doi.org/10.2514/6.
2010-6891 .
82. Himeno, T. et al. Heat exchange and pressure drop enhanced by
sloshing. 47th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion
Conference and Exhibit 2011 https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2011-
5682 (2011).
83. Arndt, T., Dreyer, M., Behruzi, P., Winter, M. & van Foreest, A.
Cryogenic sloshing tests in a pressurized cylindrical reservoir. In
45th AIAA/ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference and
Exhibit. https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2009-4860.
84. Ludwig, C., Dreyer, M. & Hop ﬁnger, E. Pressure variations in a
cryogenic liquid storage tank subjected to periodic excitations.Int. J.
Heat. Mass Tran. 66, 223– 234 (2013).
85. Kulev, N., Basting, S., Bänsch, E. & Dreyer, M. Interface reorientation
of cryogenic liquids under non-isothermal boundary conditions.
Cryogenics 62,4 8– 59 (2014).
86. Schmitt, S. & Dreyer, M. E. Free surface oscillations of liquid
hydrogen in microgravity conditions. Cryogenics 72,2 2– 35 (2015).
87. Friese, P. S., Hop ﬁnger, E. J. & Dreyer, M. E. Liquid hydrogen
sloshing in superheated vessels under microgravity. Exp. Therm.
Fluid Sci. 106, 100– 118 (2019).
88. Fuhrmann, E. & Dreyer, M. E. Heat and mass transfer at a free surface
with diabatic boundaries in a single-species system under
microgravity conditions. Exp. Fluids 55,1 – 18 (2014).
89. Fuhrmann, E., Dreyer, M., Basting, S. & Bänsch, E. Free surface
deformation and heat transfer by thermocapillary convection. Heat.
Mass Transf. 52, 855– 876 (2016).
90. Carey, V. P. Liquid-Vapor Phase-Change Phenomena: An Introduction
to the Thermophysics of Vaporization and Condensation Processes in
Heat Transfer Equipment(CRC Press, 2018).
91. Dziubinski, M., Fidos, H. & Sosno, M. The ﬂow pattern map of a two-
phase non-Newtonian liquid– gas ﬂow in the vertical pipe. Int. J.
Multiph. Flow. 30, 551– 563 (2004).
92. Velat, C. J. Experiments in Cryogenic Two-Phase Flow. Master
thesis, University of Florida (2004).
93. Yuan, K., Chung, J. N. & Ji, Y. Cryogenic two-phase ﬂow and heat
transfer under terrestrial and microgravity. vol. Heat Transfer, Part B
of ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and
Exposition, 265– 270 (2005).
94. Jackson, J. K. Cryogenic Two-Phase Flow During Chilldown: Flow
Transition and Nucleate Boiling Heat Transfer (University of
Florida, 2006).
95. Agarwal, A. Numerical Simulation of Cryogenic Flow with Phase
Change Using Sharp Interface Cut-cell Method . Ph.D. thesis,
University of Florida (2010).
96. Yuan, K. Cryogenic Boiling and Two-Phase Chilldown Process
Under Terrestrial and Microgravity Conditions . Ph.D. thesis,
University of Florida (2006).
97. Burke, J., Byrnes, W., Post, A. & Ruccia, F. Pressurized cooldown of
cryogenic transfer lines. In Advances in Cryogenic Engineering:
Proceedings of the 1958 Cryogenic Engineering Conference ,
378– 394 (Springer, 1960).
98. Bronson, J. et al. Problems in cool-down of cryogenic systems. In
Advances in Cryogenic Engineering: Proceedings of the 1961
Cryogenic Engineering Conference University of Michigan Ann
Arbor 198– 205 (Springer, 1962).
99. Zhang, H., Mudawar, I. & Hasan, M. M. Assessment of
dimensionless CHF correlations for subcooled ﬂow boiling in
microgravity and earth gravity. Int. J. Heat. Mass Transf. 50,
4568– 4580 (2007).
100. Antar, B. N. & Collins, F. G. Flow boiling during quench in low gravity
environment. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 10, 118– 128 (1997).
101. Kawanami, O., Azuma, H. & Ohta, H. Effect of gravity on cryogenic
boiling heat transfer during tube quenching. Int. J. Heat. Mass Tran.
50, 3490– 3497 (2007).
102. Lema Rodriguez, M. Multiphase Fluid Hammer: Modeling,
Experiments and Simulations. Ph.D. thesis, von Karman Institute for
Fluid Dynamics (2013).
103. Porca, P., Lema, M., Rambaud, P. & Steelant, J. Experimental and
numerical multiphase-front ﬂuid hammer. J. Propul. Power 30,
368– 376 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 11

104. Pinho, J., Lema, M., Rambaud, P. & Steelant, J. Multiphase
investigation of water hammer phenomenon using the full cavitation
model. J. Propul. Power 30, 105– 113 (2014).
105. Kakac, S. & Bon, B. A review of two-phase ﬂow dynamic
instabilities in tube boiling systems. Int. J. Heat. Mass Tran. 51,
399– 433 (2008).
106. Ruspini, L. C., Marcel, C. P. & Clausse, A. Two-phase ﬂow
instabilities: a review. Int. J. Heat. Mass Tran. 71, 521– 548 (2014).
107. Manavela Chiapero, E., Fernandino, M. & Dorao, C. Review on
pressure drop oscillations in boiling systems. Nucl. Eng. Des. 250,
436– 447 (2012).
108. Esposito, C., St eelant, J. & Vetrano, M. R. Impact of cryogenics
on cavitation through an ori ﬁce: a review. Energies 14,
8319 (2021).
109. Gouriet, J.-B., Huertas-Martinez, A., Buchlin, J.-M., Vetrano, M. R. &
Steelant, J. Multiphase ﬂuid hammer with cryogenic ﬂuids. In 9th
Space Propulsion (2016).
110. Peveroni, L., Esposito, C., Pinho, J., Steelant, J. & Gouriet, J.-B.
Hydro-thermodynamic behaviour of a hydraulic restriction in liquid
nitrogen in steady-state and ﬂuid-Hammer conditions. In Aerospace
Europe Conference (2020).
111. Klein, S., Traudt, T. & Oschwald, M. Comparison of water and
cryogenic ﬂuid hammer experiments for rocket engine feed line
systems. Exp. Fluids 64, 30 (2023).
112. Elvira, R., Monzón, A., Fernández Cabrera, J. & Riesgo, I.
Waterhammer effect in microgravity environment. AIP Conf. Proc.
905, 245– 246 (2007).
113. Khusid, B. et al. Topical: Boiling, Condensation and Two-phase
Flows in Microgravity. Tech. Rep. (2021).
114. Cassady, J. et al. The Seventh Community Workshop for
Achievability and Sustainability of Human Exploration of Mars. In
The Seventh Community Workshop for Achievability and
Sustainability of Human Exploration of Mars (Explore Mars Inc. and
The American Astronautical Society, 2019).
115. Delee, C. H. et al. Techniques for on-orbit cryogenic servicing.
Cryogenics 64, 289– 294 (2014).
116. Flynn, T. M. Cryogenic engineering, Revised and Expanded. (2nd
ed.) (CRC Press, 2005).
117. Taylor, W. J., Chato, D. J., Moran, M. M. & Nyland, T. W. On-orbit
cryogenic ﬂuid transfer research at NASA Lewis Research Center.
Cryogenics 32, 199– 204 (1992).
118. Chato, D. J. Cryogenic ﬂuid transfer for exploration. Cryogenics 48,
206– 209 (2008).
119. Bellur, K. et al. Visualization of the evaporation and condensation
phenomena in cryogenic propellants. J. Flow. Vis. Image Process.
23, 137– 156 (2016).
120. Bellur, K., Médici, E. F., Hermanson, J. C., Choi, C. K. & Allen, J. S.
Determining solid-ﬂuid interface temperature distribution during
phase change of cryogenic propellants using transient thermal
modeling. Cryogenics 91, 103– 111 (2018).
121. Obreschkow, D. et al. Cavitation bubble dynamics inside liquid
drops in microgravity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97,3 – 6 (2006).
122. Farhat, M. What we learned from cavitation bubbles in microgravity.
In Pletser, V. (ed.) Preparation of Space Experiments (2021).
123. Kobel, P., Obreschkow, D., De Bosset, A., Dorsaz, N. & Farhat, M.
Techniques for generating centimetric drops in microgravity and
application to cavitation studies. Exp. Fluids 47,3 9– 48 (2009).
124. De Bosset, A., Obreschkow, D., Kobel, P., Dorsaz, N. & Farhat, M.
Direct effects of gravity on cavitation bubble collapse. Int.
Astronautical Federation - 58th Int. Astronautical Congr. 2007 1,
519– 523 (2007).
125. Sielaff, A. et al. The multiscale boiling investigation on-board the
International Space Station: a overview. Appl. Therm. Eng. 205,
117932 (2022).
126. Ronshin, F., Sielaff, A., Tadrist, L., Stephan, P. & Kabov, O. Dynamics
of bubble growth during boiling at microgravity. J. Phys. Conf. Ser.
2119, 012170 (2021).
127. Nejati, I. et al. Experimental investigation of single bubble
nucleate boiling in microgravity. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 32,
597– 607 (2020).
128. Vreeburg, J. Measured states of SLOSHSAT FLEVO. Technical
report (National Aerospace Laboratory, 2005).
129. Veldman, A. E., Gerrits, J., Luppes, R., Helder, J. A. & Vreeburg, J.
The numerical simulation of liquid sloshing on board spacecraft. J.
Comput. Phys. 224,8 2– 99 (2007).
130. Storey, J. M., Kirk, D., Marsell, B. & Schallhorn, P. Progress towards
a microgravity CFD validation study using the ISS SPHERES-
SLOSH experiment. In AIAA Propulsion and Energy 2020 Forum .
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2020-3814.
131. Behruzi, P., Roascio, D., Kirk, D. R., Lapilli, G. & Zachrau, H. J.
Spheres tether slosh free ﬂyer experiment on ISS. In 2018 Joint
Propulsion Conference (American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics Inc, AIAA, 2018).
132. Lepilliez, M., Popescu, E. R., Gibou, F. & Tanguy, S. On two-phase
ﬂow solvers in irregular domains with contact line. J. Comput. Phys.
321, 1217– 1251 (2016).
133. Dalmon, A. et al. Comparison between the FLUIDICS experiment
and direct numerical simulations of ﬂuid sloshing in spherical tanks
under microgravity conditions. Microgravity Sci. Technol. 31,
123– 138 (2019).
134. Hu, H., Chung, J. N. & Amber, S. H. An experimental study on ﬂow
patterns and heat transfer characteristics during cryogenic
chilldown in a vertical pipe. Cryogenics 52, 268– 277 (2012).
135. Rame, E., Hartwig, J. W. & McQuillen, J. B. Flow visualization of liquid
hydrogen line chill down tests. In52nd Aerospace Sciences Meeting
https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2014-1074 (2014).
136. Hartwig, J. et al. Nitrogen ﬂow boiling and chilldown experiments in
microgravity using pulse ﬂow and low-thermally conductive
coatings. npj Microgravity 8, 33 (2022).
Acknowledgements
The authors thank ESA for supporting this article and the Topical Team
on Propellant Management Physics (C.N. 4000127841/19/NL/PG/pt).
The authors from Germany acknowledge the funding by the German
Aerospace Center through grant numbers 50WM2248 and 50RL2290.
The authors from Belgium acknowledge BELSPO for supporting their
activities on Propellant Management through grant number
4000142407.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the conception of this publication.
A. Simonini coordinated the realization of the manuscript. A. Simonini,
M. Dreyer, A. Urbano, F. Sanfedino, P. Behruzi, J. Pinho, and T. Himeno
contributed to writing the different sections. All authors reviewed the
manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Alessia Simonini.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 12

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article ’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted
by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2024
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41526-024-00377-5 Perspective
npj Microgravity |           (2024) 10:34 13