From comparative risk assessment to multi-criteria decision analysis and
adaptive management: Recent developments and applications
I. Linkov a,⁎, F.K. Satterstrom b, G. Kiker c, C. Batchelor d, T. Bridges d, E. Ferguson d
a Intertox Inc., 83 Winchester Street, Suite 1, Brookline, MA 02446, USA
b Cambridge Environmental Inc., 58 Charles Street, Cambridge, MA 02141, USA
c University of Florida, Gaineville, FL 32611, USA
d U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center , Environmental Laboratory, 3909 Halls Ferry Rd, Vicksburg, MS 39180, USA
Available online 14 August 2006
Abstract
Environmental risk assessment and decision-making strategies over the last several decades have become increasingly more sophisticated,
information-intensive, and complex, including such approaches as expert judgment, cost –benefit analysis, and toxicological risk assessment. One
tool that has been used to support environmental decision-making is comparative risk assessment (CRA), but CRA lacks a structured method for
arriving at an optimal project alternative. Multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) provides better-supported techniques for the comparison of
project alternatives based on decision matrices, and it also provides structured methods for the incorporation of project stakeholders' opinions i n
the ranking of alternatives. We argue that the inherent uncertainty in our ability to predict ecosystem evolution and response to different
management policies requires shifting from optimization-based management to an adaptive management paradigm. This paper brings together a
multidisciplinary review of existing decision-making approaches at regulatory agencies in the United States and Europe and synthesizes state-of-
the-art research in CRA, MCDA, and adaptive management methods applicable to environmental remediation and restoration projects. We
propose a basic decision analytic framework that couples MCDA with adaptive management and its public participation and stakeholder value
elicitation methods, and we demonstrate application of the framework to a realistic case study based on contaminated sediment management issues
in the New York/New Jersey Harbor.
© 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Comparative risk assessment; Decision analysis; Adaptive management; Risk analysis; Sediments
1. Introduction: comparative risk assessment and evolving
decision analysis methodologies
Risk management of environmental projects requires balanc-
ing scientific findings with multi-faceted input from many
stakeholders with different values and objectives. In such
instances, systematic decision analysis tools are an appropriate
method to solve complex technical and behavioral issues
(McDaniels, 1999 ). Regardless of the specific project, risk
managers typically have four types of information that are used to
make decisions: 1) the results of modeling and monitoring studies,
2) risk analysis, 3) cost or cost –benefit analysis, and 4)
stakeholder preferences (Fig. 1a). These four types of information
range from extremely quantitative to extremely qualitative, and
structured information about stakeholder preferences may not be
presented to decision-makers at all. In cases where the decision-
maker does receive information on stakeholder preferences, the
information may be handled in a subjective manner that
exacerbates the difficulty of defending the decision process as
reliable or fair. Moreover, where structured approaches to
combining the four categories of information are employed,
they may be perceived as lacking the flexibility to adapt to
localized concerns or faithfully represent minority viewpoints. A
systematic method of combining quantitative and qualitative
inputs from scientific studies of risk, cost and cost –benefit
analyses, and stakeholder views has yet to be fully developed for
environmental decision-making. As a result, decision-makers
often do not optimally use all available and useful information in
choosing between identified project alternatives.
In response to these decision-making challenges, some
regulatory agencies and environmental managers have moved
toward more integrative decision analytic processes, such as
comparative risk assessment (CRA) or multi-criteria decision
Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 – 1093
www.elsevier.com/locate/envint
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 617 233 9869.
E-mail address: ilinkov@intertox.com (I. Linkov).
0160-4120/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.envint.2006.06.013

analysis (MCDA). These methods are designed to raise
awareness of the trade-offs that must be made among competing
project objectives, help compare alternatives that are dramat-
ically different in their potential impacts or outcomes, and
synthesize a wider variety of information ( Fig. 1 b).
Comparative risk analysis has been most commonly applied
within the realm of policy analysis. Andrews et al. (2004) , for
example, distinguish between CRA use at macro and micro
scales. At the macro scale, programmatic CRA has helped to
characterize regional and national environmental priorities by
comparing the multi-dimensional risks associated with policy
alternatives. U.S. government agencies at various levels have
logged significant experience with policy-oriented, macro-level
CRA. International CRA applications are reviewed in Tal and
Linkov (2004) and in Linkov and Ramadan (2004). At smaller
scales, so-called micro-CRA studies have compared interrelated
risks involving specific policy choices, such as chemical versus
microbial disease risks in drinking water. In these micro-scale
applications, the CRAs often have specific objectives within the
broader goal of evaluating and comparing possible alternatives
and their risks. Bridges et al. (2005) discuss micro-scale
applications of CRA in more detail.
Central to CRA is the construction of a two-dimensional
decision matrix that contains project alternatives' scores on
various criteria. However, CRA lacks a structured method for
combining performance on criteria to identify an optimal project
alternative. MCDA methods and tools, on the other hand, do
provide a systematic approach for integrating risk levels,
uncertainty and valuation. MCDA helps decision-makers
evaluate and choose among alternatives based on multiple
criteria using systematic analysis that overcomes the limitations
of unstructured individual or group decision-making. Although
almost all decision analysis methodologies share similar steps
of organization in the construction of the decision matrix (often
the end result of the CRA process), there are many MCDA
methodologies which each synthesize the matrix information
and rank the alternatives by different means ( Yoe, 2002). Yet,
taken by themselves, few MCDA approaches are specifically
designed to incorporate multiple stakeholder perspectives or
competing value systems.
Fortunately, MCDA tools can be naturally linked with an
adaptive management paradigm. Adaptive management explic-
itly acknowledges the uncertainty in managers' knowledge of a
system. As a consequence of this uncertainty, adaptive
management holds that no single best policy can be selected,
but rather a set of alternatives should be dynamically tracked to
gain information about the effects of different courses of action.
Adaptive management concepts were introduced more than
20 years ago, but their implementation to date has been
primarily limited to a few large-scale projects in long-term
natural resource management, where uncertainty is so over-
whelming that optimization is not possible. Even though
managers of smaller projects are confronted with the same
problems and often have to go through the frustrating
experience of changing their management strategy when it
fails, our review shows that the field of environmental
management is far from accepting and using adaptive
management approaches. Although adaptive management is
recognized and even recommended by many state and
government agencies, adaptive management applications vary
widely in their implementation of the concept and there is no
framework that robustly incorporates adaptive management in
environmental practice.
In this paper, we review regulatory policies and case studies
of MCDA applications and successful adaptive management
implementation across a wide range of projects and application
areas. Our review indicates a need to integrate adaptive
management with a set of decision-making tools that will
allow it to build on current optimization-based management
approaches. We are thus proposing a solution in which we
Fig. 1. Current (a) and evolving (b) decision-making processes for contaminated sediment management.
1073I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

choose a strong adaptive management framework, for which
there exist many support tools in the literature, and integrate it
with multi-criteria decision analysis as a best method for dealing
with uncertainty when selecting a management option. The two
methods complement each other and form a comprehensive
management framework.
2. Comparative risk assessment application to New Y ork/
New Jersey Harbor
We have taken the New York/New Jersey Harbor as a case
study to illustrate an environmental management problem that
could benefit from combined MCDA/adaptive management
application. A decision scenario for the harbor is presented in
Fig. 2 . The harbor faces contaminated sediment management
issues — several million cubic meters of sediments must be
dredged each year to maintain navigation channels for harbor
access ( Wakeman and Themelis, 2001 ). Due to long-term
human use of the harbor area, significant contaminant
concentrations have been recorded in certain areas. Additional
challenges have been created by the restriction of ocean disposal
to only clean sediments, as well as plans for deepening existing
channels to allow increased access for larger vessels. For these
reasons, decision-makers elected to systematically explore
additional sediment management options and their associated
costs and risks.
A comparative screening-level risk assessment ( Driscoll
et al., 2002 ) was developed for generalized areas within the
Fig. 2. (a) Example decision criteria for the New York/New Jersey Harbor. Blue box: NY/NJ Dredged Material Management Plan (USACE, 1999) and Expert Opinion;
red boxes: Driscoll et al. (2002); (b) example decision matrix for the New York/New Jersey Harbor. An ⁎ beside a criteria value denotes an estimated value of 0 where
Driscoll et al. (2002) provided a rating of “not applicable”.
1074 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

harbor. Eight sediment management alternatives (including no
action) were identified for consideration and assessed according
to their performance on the criteria of human health risk and
ecological risk: Confined Aquatic Disposal (CAD) refers to
placing the sediments within a pit or depression on the bottom
of a water body and capping the contaminated sediments with
clean sediment; a Confined Disposal Facility (CDF) is a diked
area where dredged material is placed and stored; Landfill refers
to placement at a landfill site; and Cement Lock and
Manufactured Soil refer to treatment or processing techniques
that are applied to prepare the material for storage or subsequent
beneficial uses ( Fig. 2 ). To evaluate human health risk, three
criteria were selected: the number of complete human exposure
pathways, the maximum cancer risk calculated from all the
pathways, and fish chemical-of-concern (COC) concentration.
To evaluate ecological risk, two similar criteria were selected:
the number of complete exposure pathways and the maximum
calculated hazard quotient from all the pathways. The estimated
cost in dollars per cubic yard was used as a cost criterion. Cost
estimates were derived from expert interviews as well as
estimates from the Dredged Material Management Plan
(DMMP) for the Port of New York and New Jersey ( USACE,
1999). In the example developed here, the impacted area (i.e .
the amount of land required to manage the contamination)
divided by the overall project capacity, an additional measure of
cost, was expected to be inversely correlated with public
acceptance. Fig. 2b provides the quantitative estimates for these
criteria to parameterize the decision matrix (for greater detail,
see Kiker and Bridges, submitted for publication ).
The result of CRA is usually a qualitative examination of the
decision matrix. For example, the conclusions of Driscoll et al.
(2002) include: “the extent of the impacted area … is
substantially greater for the near-shore and upland CDFs than
for the island CDF; ”“ risk from the island CDF is greater than
other placement and treatment alternatives; ” and “relative risk
for exposure to the undiluted sediment of the no-action
alternative exceeds the relative risk of all other alternatives. ”
Even though these conclusions may be indeed useful, they do
not provide integration across multiple criteria and multiple
alternatives. The rest of this paper presents decision support
tools for higher-level integration of criteria and alternatives.
3. MCDA methods and tools
In contrast to CRA, MCDA provides a more fully developed
approach to environmental management ( Table 1). Whereas a
decision matrix marks the endpoint for CRA, it is only an
intermediate product of MCDA. After matrix generation,
different MCDA methods require different types of value
information and follow various optimization algorithms. A
detailed analysis of the theoretical foundations of these methods
and their comparative strengths and weaknesses is presented in
Belton and Stewart (2002). Some techniques rank options, some
identify a single optimal alternative, some provide an
incomplete ranking, and others differentiate between acceptable
and unacceptable alternatives.
Table 2 summarizes a number of current, sophisticated
MCDA methods. Multi-attribute utility theory (MAUT) and the
analytical hierarchy process (AHP) are more complex methods
that use optimization algorithms, whereas outranking eschews
optimization in favor of a dominance approach. The optimiza-
tion approaches employ numerical scores to quantify the merit
of each option on a single scale. Scores are developed from the
performance of alternatives with respect to individual criteria
and aggregated into an overall score. Individual scores may be
simply summed or averaged, or a weighting mechanism can be
used to favor some criteria more heavily than others. The goal of
MAUT is to find a simple expression for the net benefits of a
decision. Through the use of utility or value functions, the
MAUT method transforms diverse criteria, such as those shown
Table 1
Comparison of decision process elements for ad hoc decision-making, comparative risk assessment, and multi-criteria decision analysis
Elements of decision process Ad hoc decision-making Comparative risk assessment Multi-criteria decision analysis
Define problems Stakeholder input limited or
non-existent. Therefore,
stakeholder concerns may not
be addressed by alternatives.
Stakeholder input collected after the
problem is defined by decision-makers
and experts. Problem definition is
possibly refined based on stakeholder input.
Stakeholder input incorporated at beginning
of problem formulation stage. Often provides
higher stakeholder agreement on problem
definition. Thus, proposed solutions have a
better chance at satisfying all stakeholders.
Generate alternatives Alternatives are chosen by
decision-maker usually from
pre-existing choices with
some expert input.
Alternatives are generated through
formal involvement of experts in more
site-specific manner.
Alternatives are generated through
involvement of all stakeholders including
experts.
Involvement of all stakeholders increases
likelihood of novel alternative generation.
Formulate criteria by which
to judge alternatives
Criteria by which to judge
alternatives are often not
explicitly considered and
defined.
Criteria and sub-criteria are often defined. Criteria and sub-criteria hierarchies
are developed based on expert and
stakeholder judgment.
Gather value judgments
on relative importance
of criteria
Non-quantitative criteria
valuation weighted by
decision-maker
Quantitative criteria weights are sometimes
formulated by the decision-maker, but in a
poorly justified manner.
Quantitative criteria weights are obtained
from decision-makers and stakeholders.
Rank/select final
alternatives
Alternative often chosen
based on implicit weights
in an opaque manner.
Alternative chosen by aggregation of
criteria scores through weight of evidence
discussions or qualitative considerations.
Alternative chosen by systematic, well-
defined algorithms using criteria scores
and weights.
1075I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

in Fig. 2 , into one common scale of utility or value. MAUT
relies on the assumptions that the decision-maker is rational
(preferring more utility to less utility, for example), that the
decision-maker has perfect knowledge, and that the decision-
maker is consistent in his judgments. The goal of decision-
makers in this process is to maximize utility or value. Because
poor scores on criteria can be compensated for by high scores on
other criteria, MAUT is part of a group of MCDA techniques
known as “compensatory” methods.
Similar to MAUT, AHP aggregates various facets of the
decision problem using a single optimization function known as
the objective function. The goal of AHP is to select the
alternative that results in the greatest value of the objective
function. Like MAUT, AHP is a compensatory optimization
approach. However, AHP uses a quantitative comparison
method that is based on pair-wise comparisons of decision
criteria rather than utility or weighting functions. All individual
criteria must be paired against all others and the results
compiled in matrix form. For example, in examining the choices
in the remediation of contaminated sediments, the decision-
maker would answer questions such as, “With respect to the
selection of a sediment alternative, which is more important:
public acceptability or cost? ” The user uses a numerical scale to
compare the choices, and AHP moves systematically through
all pair-wise comparisons of criteria and alternatives. The AHP
technique thus relies on the supposition that humans are more
capable of making relative judgments than absolute judgments.
Consequently, the rationality assumption in AHP is more
relaxed than in MAUT.
Unlike MAUT and AHP , outranking is based on the principle
that one alternative may have a degree of dominance over another
(Kangas et al., 2001 ). Dominance occurs when one option
performs better than another on at least one criterion and no
worse than the other on all criteria (ODPM, 2004). However, out-
ranking techniques do not presuppose that a single best alternative
can be identified. Outranking models compare the performance of
two (or more) alternatives at a time, initially in terms of each
criterion, to identify the extent to which a preference for one over
the other can be asserted. Outranking techniques then aggregate the
preference information across all relevant criteria and seek to
establish the strength of evidence favoring selection of one
alternative over another. For example, an outranking technique
may entail favoring the alternative that performs the best on the
greatest number of criteria. Thus , outranking techniques allow
inferior performance on some criteria to be compensated for by
superior performance on others. They do not necessarily, however,
take into account the magnitude of relative under-performance in a
criterion versus the magnitude of over-performance in another
Table 2
Comparison of critical elements, strengths and weaknesses of several advanced MCDA methods: MAUT, AHP , and outranking
(after ODPM, 2004; Larichev and Olson, 2001 )
Method Important elements Strengths Weaknesses
Multi-attribute
utility theory
Expression of overall performance of an alternative
in a single, non-monetary number representing the
utility of that alternative
Easier to compare alternatives whose overall
scores are expressed as single numbers
Maximization of utility may not
be important to decision-makers
Criteria weights often obtained by directly
surveying stakeholders
Choice of an alternative can be transparent if
highest scoring alternative is chosen
Criteria weights obtained through
less rigorous stakeholder surveys
may not accurately reflect
stakeholders' true preferences
Theoretically sound — based on
utilitarian philosophy
Rigorous stakeholder preference
elicitations are expensive
Many people prefer to express net utility in
non-monetary terms
Analytical
hierarchy
process
Criteria weights and scores are based on
pairwise comparisons of criteria and
alternatives, respectively
Surveying pairwise comparisons is
easy to implement
The weights obtained from
pairwise comparison are strongly
criticized for not reflecting people's
true preferences
Mathematical procedures can
yield illogical results.
For example, rankings developed
through AHP are sometimes
not transitive
Outranking One option outranks another if: “it outperforms
the other on enough criteria of sufficient importance
(as reflected by the sum of criteria weights) ” and
it “is not outperformed by the other in the sense
of recording a significantly inferior performance
on any one criterion ”
Does not require the reduction of all
criteria to a single unit
Does not always take into account
whether over-performance on one
criterion can make up for under-
performance on another
Allows options to be classified as “incomparable” Explicit consideration of possibility that very
poor performance on a single criterion may
eliminate an alternative from consideration, even
if that criterion's performance is compensated
for by very good performance
on other criteria
The algorithms used in outranking
are often relatively complex and not
well understood by decision-makers
1076 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

criterion. Therefore, outranking models are known as “partially
compensatory”. Outranking techniques are most appropriate when
criteria metrics are not easily aggregated, measurement scales vary
over wide ranges, and units are incommensurate or incomparable
(Seager, 2004).
4. MCDA applications in environmental management
Our non-exhaustive review of recent literature ( Table 3 )
shows that MCDA has been used to support decision-making in
contaminated site management and related areas. In this section
we summarize decision analysis applications published in
English language journals over the last 10 years that were
located through Internet and library database searches (for
greater detail, see Linkov et al., 2004, 2003). MCDA techniques
have been applied to optimize policy selection in the
remediation of contaminated sites, the reduction of contami-
nants entering aquatic ecosystems, the optimization of water
and coastal resources, and the management of other resources.
In some of these studies, the researchers have explicitly taken
into account the opinions of local community groups and other
stakeholders through focus groups, surveys, and other techni-
ques and formally integrated these opinions into the decision
process. Many papers reviewed in this section conclude that
application of MCDA methods provides a significant improve-
ment in the decision process and public acceptance of the
suggested remedial or abatement policy.
4.1. Remediation of contaminated sediments and aquatic
ecosystems
MCDA has been applied to the remediation of sediments and
aquatic systems. MAUT, for example, has been used in radioactive
site management (Arvai and Gregory, 2003; Gallego et al., 2004;
Ríos-Insua et al., 2002) and has also been utilized in the Superfund
cleanup process ( Grelk, 1997; Grelk et al., 1998; Parnell et al.,
2001). Wakeman (2003) uses the simple multi-attribute rating
technique (SMART) to analyze alternatives for dredging contam-
inated sediments at a Superfund site in Montana. Pavlou and
Stansbury (1998)apply a formal analysis of the trade-off between
environmental risk reduction and cost to contaminated sediment
disposal, andStansbury et al. (1999)later augment the use of risk–
cost trade-off analysis with fuzzy set theory and composite
programming.Rogers et al. (2004) employ an outranking method
to incorporate stakeholder values into the process of selecting one
of a group of novel technological alternatives for sediment
management. Apostolakis and his colleagues (Apostolakis, 2001;
Bonano et al., 2000; Accorsi et al., 1999a,b ) developed a
methodology that uses AHP , influence diagrams, MAUT, and
risk assessment techniques to integrate the results of advanced
impact evaluation techniques with stakeholder preferences.
4.2. Reduction of contaminants introduced into aquatic ecosystems
In addition to being used in the remediation of contaminated
sites, MCDA techniques have been used in attempts to reduce
the amount of pollution entering aquatic ecosystems. Doley et
al. (2001) use models and cost-effectiveness analysis to find an
optimal way to reduce nitrogen discharge into the Potomac
River. Wladis et al. (1999) evaluate alternative emission control
scenarios for NO x,S O 2, and NH 3, considering how these
pollutants affect groundwater. Kholghi (2001) and Ganoulis
(2003) apply MCDA to decide how to manage wastewater in
North America and the Mediterranean, respectively. Kholgi
uses MAUT to decide among alternatives, while Ganoulis
illustrates the use of a distance technique through a case study.
Outranking has also been used to prioritize wastewater projects
(Al-Rashdan et al., 1999 ) and to find an optimal wastewater
treatment system ( V an Moeffaert, 2002).
4.3. Allocation of water and coastal resources
MCDA techniques have been extensively used to help
balance the sometimes conflicting demands of environmental
conservation and business development with regards to water
allocation and coastal development. MAUT-based methods
have been applied to compare current and alternative water
control plans in the Missouri River ( Prato, 2003 ), while Ni,
Borthwick, and Qin use AHP to determine the optimal length
and location for a coastline reclamation project ( Ni et al., 2002;
Qin et al., 2002 ). Other MCDA methods, including distance
techniques such compromise programming and game theory,
have also been used ( Mimi and Sawalhi, 2003 ). Analyses of
water bodies in the United States ( Bella et al., 1996 ), Europe
(Özelkan and Duckstein, 1996), and South Africa (Joubert et al.,
1997) have examined water uses such as consumption,
recreation, conservation, and power generation, while a number
of other analyses (Gregory and Failing, 2002; Hämäläinen et al.,
2001; Marttunen and Hämäläinen, 1995; Gregory and Wellman,
2001; McDaniels, 1999; Gregory et al., 2001; Whitaker and
Focht, 2001) seek to optimize water use planning using MAUT,
AHP , and other MCDA techniques eliciting user opinions to
determine alternatives, criteria, and criteria values.
4.4. Management of other resources
MCDA has also been used to manage wetlands, coral reefs,
and fisheries. Herath (2004) uses AHP to decide how many
wetlands in Australia should be created to increase nature-based
tourism. When faced with deciding whether to increase tourism
at coral reefs, Fernandes et al. (1999) also use AHP techniques,
while Brown et al. (2001) use stakeholder workshops to elicit
stakeholder opinions and a less-quantitative trade-off analysis to
select a management option for Buccoo Reef Marine Park in
Tobago. In two papers ( Mardle et al., 2004; Soma, 2003 ), AHP
analysis involving stakeholder opinion is also applied to fishery
management. McDaniels (1995) uses a MAUT approach to
select among alternatives for a commercial fishery in the
context of conflicting long-term objectives for salmon man-
agement. Similarly, Mardle and Pascoe (2002) use MAUT in
fishery management while Gurocak and Whittlesey (1998) use a
combination of fuzzy set theory and if –then rules. Merritt
(2001) uses AHP to identify the optimal allocation of funds for
research into fish stocks.
1077I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Table 3
MCDA applications for contaminated site management and related areas
Area Method Decision context Funding agency Citation
Remediation of contaminated
sediments and aquatic ecosystems.
Risk–cost trade-off analysis, fuzzy
set theory, composite programming
Disposal of dredged materials USACE and University of Nebraska Stansbury et al., 1999
Risk–cost trade-off analysis Disposal of dredged materials URS Greiner Inc.; University of
Nebraska–Lincoln
Pavlou and Stansbury, 1998
SMART Choosing a remedial action alternative at
Superfund Site
USACE Wakeman, 2003
MAUT Remediation of aquatic ecosystems contaminated
by radionuclides using MOIRA
EC projects Ríos-Insua et al., 2002;
Gallego et al., 2004
MAUT Remediation of mixed-waste subsurface disposal site DOE Grelk, 1997; Grelk et al., 1998;
Parnell et al., 2001
Outranking (PROMETHEE) Selecting novel technological alternatives for
sediment management
Dartmouth College and the University
of New Hampshire
Rogers et al., 2004
MAUT Identifying radioactive waste cleanup priorities at DOE sites DOE/NSF Arvai and Gregory, 2003
AHP , MAUT Questionnaires DOE Apostolakis, 2001;
Bonano et al., 2000;
Accorsi et al., 1999a,b
Reduction of contaminants
introduced into aquatic ecosystems
Cost-effectiveness analysis Optimizing method to reduce nitrogen discharge to
the Potomac River by 40%
SAIC Doley et al., 2001
Cost–benefit analysis Protection of groundwater through choosing from
among various alternatives for reducing sulfur dioxide,
nitrogen oxides, and ammonia airborne emissions
Environment and Climate Program,
European Union
Wladis et al., 1999
MAUT Wastewater planning management. Agricultural University of Tehran, Iran Kholghi, 2001
Outranking (ELECTRE), distance
(compromise programming)
Wastewater recycling and reuse in the Mediterranean Aristotle University, Greece Ganoulis, 2003
Fuzzy outranking (NAIADE) Choosing a sustainable wastewater treatment system
in Surahammar, Sweden
Swedish Foundation for
Strategic Environmental Research
V an Moeffaert, 2002
Outranking (PROMETHEE) Prioritization of wastewater projects in Jordan Staffordshire University, UK Al-Rashdan et al., 1999
Elicitation of criteria from
stakeholders
Determining the effects of a proposed 30% reduction
in nitrogen loading to the Neuse Estuary in
North Carolina
University of North Carolina Borsuk et al., 2001
Optimization of water
and coastal resources
Outranking (PROMETHEE-I, II;
GAIA; MCQA-I, II, III), distance
(compromise programming;
cooperative game theory)
Pick optimal use of Danube region between
Vienna and Slovakian border from choices like
hydroelectric station and a national park
NSF and USACE Özelkan and Duckstein, 1996
Distance (compromise
programming) and
outranking (ELECTRE III)
Water allocation in the Upper Rio Grande USACE, NSF, US –Hungarian
Joint Research and Technology Fund
Bella et al., 1996
Distance Allocating waters of Jordan River basin to
bordering nations
Birzeit University, Palestine Mimi and Sawalhi, 2003
MAUT Consideration expansion of water supply to
Cape Town, South Africa, at the expense
of regional mountain flora
University of Cape Town Joubert et al., 1997
MAUT Selection of management alternative Missouri River University of Missouri –Columbia Prato, 2003
AHP , sensitivity analysis, MAUT Optimizing the extent and location of a reclaimed coastline Chinese government, John Swire
and Sons, University College Oxford
Ni et al., 2002;
Qin et al., 2002
1078 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

MAUT Designing a water quality monitoring network for
a river system
National Cheng-Kung University, Taiwan Ning and Chang, 2002
Outranking (PROMETHEE) Choosing the extent of groundwater protection
versus economic development in an area of Elbe
River in Germany
UFZ Center for Environmental
Research, Germany
Klauer et al., 2002
MAUT Water use planning University of British Columbia,
Compass Resource Management
Gregory and Failing, 2002
MAUT + AHP Regulation of water flow in a Lake –River system Academy of Finland Hämäläinen et al., 2001
AHP and MAUT/SMART Environmental impact assessment of 2 water
development projects on a Finnish river
Finnish Environmental Agency,
Helsinki University of Technology
Marttunen and
Hämäläinen, 1995
MAUT Consensus building for water resource management
in Oregon
NSF, USEPA, Carnegie Mellon University Gregory and Wellman, 2001
Committee consensus Water management in British Columbia B.C. Hydro, Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of
Canada, NSF
McDaniels, 1999;
Gregory et al., 2001
Mental modeling Watershed management USEPA Whitaker and Focht, 2001 ;
Focht et al., 1999
Prioritization of sites/areas for
industrial/military activity
AHP + GIS Land condition assessment for allocation of
military training areas
US Army Engineering Research
and Development Center
Mendoza et al., 2002
AHP + GIS Selection of boundaries for national Park International Institute for Geoinformation
Science and Earth Observation,
the Netherlands
Sharifi et al., 2002
PROMETHEE Waste management activities in Canada Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada
V aillancourt and Waaub, 2002
ELECTRE + GIS Land management: develop a land suitability
map for housing in Switzerland
Swiss National Foundation for
Research (FNRS)
Joerin and Musy, 2000
MAUT + GIS Selection of park boundaries DOE Keisler and Sundell, 1997
Natural resource planning AHP Natural park management USDA Forest Services Schmoldt et al., 1994;
Peterson et al., 1994;
Schmoldt et al., 2001
MAUT Management of spruce budworm in Canadian forests National Science and Engineering
Research Council of Canada
Levy et al., 2000
MAUT Improvement of habitat suitability measurements Finnish Forest Research Instyitute Store and Kangas, 2001
AHP Environmental vulnerability assessment for
Mid-Atlantic Region
US EPA/DOE Tran et al., 2002
Stakeholder involvement MAUT Risk attitudes by farmers in Spain EU; Spanish Government Gomez-Limon et al., in press
MAUT Air-Quality V aluation in Korea Korea University Kwak et al., 2001
PROMETHEE Sustaining exploitation of Renewable Energy Sources National Technical University of Athens Georgopoulou et al., 1998
Management of other
resources
AHP Determining how to allocate funds for research
into fisheries
Alaska Department of Fish and Game Merritt, 2001
MAUT Fisheries management Fisheries and Oceans Canada McDaniels, 1995
Fuzzy set theory and if –then rules Analyzing plan to increase salmon population
in Columbia River
Washington State University Gurocak and Whittlesey,
1998
MAUT Estimating fishery fleet size for the North Sea EU Mardle and Pascoe, 2002
AHP Developing better management strategies for the
Wonga Wetlands on the Murray River in Australia
La Trobe University, Australia Herath, 2004
AHP Managing a coral reef East W est Center and WWF The Netherlands Fernandes et al., 1999
Trade-off analysis Choosing among four development scenarios in
for the Buccoo Reef Marine Park in Tobago
UK Deparment for International
Development
Brown et al., 2001
AHP Analyzing priorities in fishery management European Commission Mardle et al., 2004
AHP Fishery management in Trinidad and Tobago Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations
Soma, 2003
1079I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

5. Adaptive management and environmental decision-making
The MCDA methods and tools discussed above can be used to
support environmental decisions in traditional management
schemes, but we see their strength when coupled with adaptive
management. In traditional management (Fig. 3a), goals are set and
different management strategies are considered. One management
strategy is selected as the optimal one, and once it is implemented,
its performance may not be monitored closely. At some point, the
strategy will likely be evaluated, and if it is perceived to have failed
a different one will be installed in its place. The goals themselves
are not often reconsidered, and in this framework any change in the
management strategy or admission of uncertainty about the system
being managed is prone to be interpreted as failure.
Adaptive management stands in contrast to existing environ-
mental management methods. Adaptive management acknowl-
edges that uncertainty is inherent in any natural system, and it seeks
to minimize this uncertainty by learning about the system being
managed. Its basic process is straightforward: when managing any
system, one chooses a management action, monitors the effects of
the action, and adjusts the action based on the monitoring results.
There are two types of adaptive management: passive (Fig. 3b) and
active (Fig. 3c). Both processes begin with setting goals, modeling
the system, and selecting and implementing a management stra-
tegy. Passive adaptive management involves implementing one
management strategy at a time, whereas in active adaptive
management multiple experimental alternatives are examined in
contrast to a control to isolate factors which affect the system. The
managed ecosystem is then monitored to collect as much infor-
mation as possible about the effects of the management strategy on
the system. Ideally, the results of the monitoring affect model
estimation and parameter values, and the management strategy is
evaluated and adjusted as a result. During the adaptive manage-
ment process, in contrast to traditional management, change is
welcome, learning is emphasized, and even goals and objectives
for the project may be revisited and revised.
The recent publicationAdaptive Management for Water Resour-
ces Project Planning (NRC, 2004) provides a comprehensive
framework for the entire adaptiv e management process. In our
review, we use the six elements of adaptive management laid out by
the National Research Council (NRC, of the United States National
Academy of Sciences) to summarize multiple studies where ele-
ments of adaptive management were applied. This section intro-
duces these elements and presents a few important studies that
could help with understanding theframework we propose later in
this paper. Papers are drawn from a wide range of application areas,
from fisheries to wildlife management to forest, terrestrial, and
aquatic ecosystems. Readers are encouraged to consult the accom-
panying tables (where papers are laid out by application area— see
Table 4for government applications,Table 5for applications in the
literature, andTable 6 for review papers) as well as our full review
(Satterstrom et al., 2006) for more details. Although the majority of
examples are drawn from North American literature, the adaptive
management approach is applicable in all locations.
5.1. Management objectives which are regularly revisited and
accordingly revised
The first key element of adaptive management is a regular
review of a project's objectives. Stakeholders must agree on what
the basic objectives are, and the project's objectives should be
reviewed when new information becomes available. Interestingly,
Fig. 3. (a) Traditional management; (b) passive adaptive management; (c) active adaptive management.
1080 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

few adaptive management papers discuss the updating and revision
of objectives as new information is acquired. Many, in fact, take it
for granted that their objectives are static goals. The NRC explicitly
incorporates this step in its framework for the remediation of
contaminated Navy sites (NRC, 2003).
5.2. A model of the system(s) being managed
Modeling tools are integral to many adaptive management
processes. They provide a basis for understanding why change
occurs in the environment being managed and can also be used to
predict the possible effects of different strategies (such asBearlin et
al., 2002, who uses a stochastic population model for trout cod
while choosing an adaptive management strategy for their
reintroduction). Quantitative mathematical models are preferred,
but because adaptive managers often deal with substantially
uncertain situations, conceptual models are still useful (for example,
Thom, 1997, 2000). Our review indicates that modeling is one of
the more widely used components of the adaptive management
process. Nevertheless, models often address ecological processes
only; integrated models that explicitly incorporate decision
alternatives as well as costs and social considerations are still rare.
5.3. A range of management choices
An active adaptive management process includes the generation
of a range of management choices. Implementing multiple stra-
tegies simultaneously, along with a control, is conceptually similar
to a scientific experiment, albeit with less straightforward results.
Although our review shows that examples of passive adaptive
management centered around a single policy dominate the lite-
rature, there are a few good examples of the active method. In an
important early paper,Walters and Hilborn (1978)discuss adaptive
management in the context of the optimization of harvesting poli-
cies for exploited wild populations. More recently, Allison et al.
(2004) model and evaluate multiple options as they come to a
conclusion about logging road deactivation in order to manage
landslide risk and ecological health.
5.4. Monitoring and evaluation of outcomes
Once a manager has generated and implemented a range of
options, monitoring and evaluation are required to determine
which option performs the best. This is by far the most heavily
emphasized aspect of adaptive management. Many monitoring
frameworks have been developed, covering either specific types of
areas such as multinational large marine ecosystems (LMEs)
(Duda and Sherman, 2002) or protected areas in general (Parrish
et al., 2003), and ranging from simple data collection to sophis-
ticated statistical methods (Sit and Taylor, 1998).
5.5. A mechanism(s) for incorporating learning into future
decisions
Because the central idea of adaptive management is to reduce
uncertainty about the system being managed, learning is an
important goal for any project. Kiker et al. (2001) emphasize
that current knowledge is insufficient for Everglades restora-
tion, and they advance adaptive management as a way to
promote holistic understanding useful to decision-makers and
political representatives. Many other authors also espouse
learning as an objective: for example, McDaniels and Gregory
(2004) recommend that learning be a goal of the management
decision process.
5.6. A collaborative structure for stakeholder participation and
learning
An important element of adaptive management is the
inclusion of stakeholders. All affected parties, including the
public, industry, scientists, and government agencies, need to
feel represented and need to gain information through the
process. Many case studies have shown that stakeholder
involvement is essential to adaptive management ( Gunderson,
1999; Gilmour et al., 1999; Shindler and Aldred Cheek, 1999 ).
Active adaptive management could easily be seen as environ-
mental experimentation, and it is therefore important for
decision-makers to keep stakeholders – especially the public –
informed not only of its goals, but also of the problems it faces
and its methods for addressing them. When management fails to
incorporate stakeholders into decisions, distrust and political
tension result.
6. Emergence of adaptive management in regulatory
agencies
Regulatory agencies in the United States and around the
world recommend adaptive management, but agencies often
implement or emphasize only specific elements of the process.
The EPA, for instance, has implemented adaptive management
in many projects. Among the most notable are the Mississippi
River Basin project, which utilizes models and monitoring quite
heavily as it attempts to reduce the uncertainties surrounding the
biochemical mechanisms of hypoxia ( EPA, 1999a, 2001b), and
the Lake Superior Lakewide Management Plan ( EPA, 2002 ),
which calls for a less structured periodic refining of manage-
ment strategies based on new information and public input.
These EPA examples show the range of possible variability
between adaptive management projects — whereas the
Mississippi River Basin project emphasizes the modeling and
monitoring aspects of adaptive management but lacks stake-
holder involvement, the Lake Superior project does exactly the
opposite, soliciting public input but not emphasizing modeling
or monitoring.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) uses adaptive management, especially in its coastal
management and coastal habitat restoration activities ( NOAA,
2004c). The adaptive management process implemented in
these cases is passive, involving iterations of a five-step cycle:
plan, act, monitor, evaluate, and adjust ( NOAA, 2004a). NOAA
emphasizes the monitoring and evaluation elements of adaptive
management. Sutinen (2000) developed a monitoring and
assessment framework for the agency, but the degree to which
its projects include other aspects, such as modeling or
1081I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Table 4
Government application and guidance documents
Agency Topic Methods/tools Application area Elements of AM Citation(s)
123456
Environmental
Protection
Agency
Total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) for
pollutants in the environment
Follow-up monitoring and evaluation TMDLs for sediments,
pathogens
▪ ▪ EPA, 1999b, 2001a
Watershed management guide for tribes Implementation monitoring, validation monitoring,
effectiveness monitoring
Watershed
management
▪ ▪ EPA, 2000
Management of contaminated or hazardous
sites, including brownfields
Sustainable development, monitoring framework Hazardous site
management
▪ ▪ ▪ EPA, 1999a
Integrated assessment of hypoxia in the northern
Gulf of Mexico
Models to interpret change in hydrologic and
ecological systems
Coastal and marine
ecosystems
▪▪ ▪ EPA, 1999a, 2001b
Lake Superior Lakewide Management
Plan (LaMP), 2000
Extensive stakeholder involvement in LaMPs Lake management ▪ ▪▪ EPA, 2002
The “Triad” methodology for hazardous site
management, applied specifically to brownfields
Systematic project planning, dynamic work plan strategies,
and real-time measurement in service of a pre-fabricated
decision support matrix
Hazardous site
management
▪ ▪ ▪▪ ▪ EPA, 2003
Department of the
Interior
DOI's departmental manual Adaptive management required of all bureau heads NEPA compliance ▪ DOI, 2004
Southeastern adaptive management group, better
integration between research and management
Ecological and statistical theory, analytical and
decision-support tools, and institutional arrangements
Adaptive management
group
▪▪ SEAMG, 2004
The Bureau of Land Management's land use
authorizations for oil and gas programs
Emphasis on monitoring Land use ▪ BLM, 2003
Restoration and enhancement of 42 miles of
fish habitat in California while simultaneously
supporting hydroelectricity generation
Detailed monitoring Watershed
management
▪▪ ▪ ▪ ▪ USBR, 2001
Management of mercury contamination of
Sacramento River Watershed
Offsets, modeling, monitoring TMDLs, watershed
management
▪ ▪ ▪▪ USGS, 2004
National Marine
Fisheries Service
Socioeconomic and governance-related human
dimensions of managing large marine ecosystems
Interaction matrices Coastal and marine
ecosystems
▪▪ Sutinen, 2000
Coastal restoration and management guidance; case
study in Rhode Island marsh restoration
Well-formulated objectives and detailed
monitoring, system-development matrix
Coastal and marine
ecosystems
▪ ▪ ▪ ▪ NOAA, 2004a,b,c
Department of
Energy
Land use planning and process framework Learning through monitoring Land use ▪ ▪ DOE, 1996
Modernizing NEPA implementation Learning through monitoring NEPA ▪ ▪ DOE, 2003
Adaptive management of salmon and
hydroelectricity in the Columbia River basin
Models and computing power Hydropower ▪ ▪ ▪▪▪ DOE, 2002
Adaptive management of hydroelectricity in general Expedited hydropower license issuance under the
condition that adaptive management be used at the site
Hydropower ▪ FERC, 2000
Department of
Agriculture
Monitoring Implementation monitoring, baseline monitoring,
validation monitoring, effectiveness monitoring
Natural resource
conservation
▪ USDA, 2003
USDA Forest
Service
Use of new decision-making techniques in
adaptively managing the Bent Creek Experimental
Forest in Asheville, NC
Multi-criteria decision analysis — analytical
hierarchy process
Forest and terrestrial
ecosystems
▪▪▪ Rauscher et al., 2000
California Coastal
Commission
Performance evaluation for wetland
mitigation projects
Passive adaptive management, well-defined
monitoring program
Coastal and marine
ecosystems
▪▪ CCC, 1995
United States
Navy
Application of adaptive management to the
environmental cleanup of Navy facilities
V arious analytical tools for evaluating remedy
effectiveness and need for change
Remediation ▪▪▪▪▪▪ NRC, 2003
1082 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

United States
Army Corps
of Engineers
Use of ecological models and adaptive management
in restoration of coastal ecosystems
System-development matrix Coastal and marine
ecosystems
▪ ▪ ▪ ▪ ▪ Thom, 1997, 2000
Decision-making framework for United States
Army Corps of Engineers ecosystem
restoration projects
Model-building; alternative restoration designs as
“bet-hedging” strategy; multi-attribute decision analysis
General adaptive
management
▪▪ ▪▪ Pastorok et al., 1997
Guidance for monitoring within adaptive management
framework for the United States Army Corps of Engineers
Framework for monitoring in adaptive management General adaptive
management
▪▪ USACE, 2003a,b
Fisheries and
Oceans
Canada
Socioeconomic framework for ecosystem-based
fisheries management
Institutional analysis and development framework Fisheries ▪ ▪ Rudd, 2004
Health Canada Adaptive management of emissions trading as part
of mitigation measures for greenhouse gases
Stakeholder involvement and learning Climate change
management
▪ CCHO, 2000
Adaptive management in the guise of a health and air
quality risk management framework
Stakeholder involvement at every step Air quality risk
assessment
▪▪ ▪ Health Canada, 2003
Environment
Canada
The ecosystem approach to natural resource management Acknowledging uncertainty, learning about system Biodiversity
conservation
▪ Environment Canada,
2004a
Environmental assessment best practice guide for
wildlife at risk In Canada
Precautionary principle Wildlife management ▪▪▪ Environment Canada,
2004b
Canadian national wildlife disease strategy Adaptive risk assessment and problem
response framework
Wildlife management ▪ ▪ ▪ Environment Canada,
2004c
British Columbia
Forest Service
Framework and mechanics for adaptive management
of forest ecosystems
Framework for running adaptive management
workshops; solutions to common barriers
Forest and terrestrial
ecosystems
▪ ▪ ▪▪▪▪ Nyberg, 1999
Examples of case studies in which the BCFS is
applying adaptive management in the field
Management experiments to learn more about
managed system
Forest and terrestrial
ecosystems
▪▪ BCFS, 2000
British Columbia
Ministry of
Forests
Reasons to implement adaptive management, problems
with adaptive management, and tools for
adaptive management of forests in British Columbia
Workshops, decision analysis, project design teams Forest and terrestrial
ecosystems
▪▪▪▪▪▪ Taylor et al., 1997
British Columbia
Ministry of
Sustainable
Resource
Management
Land and resource management plan for the North
Coast of British Columbia
Usage of up-to-date information and implementation
of adaptive management
Forest and terrestrial
ecosystems
▪ ▪▪ BCMSRM, 2004
World Wildlife
Federation
Problems with the European Union Common Fisheries
Policy and suggestions for fixing them
Ecosystem-based management and the
precautionary principle
Fisheries ▪ WWF, 2001a
Adaptive management and example applications
in conservation
Adaptive management definition and framework General Adaptive
Management
▪▪▪▪▪ WWF, 2001b
Six Adaptive Management Criteria:
1. Management objectives that are regularly revisited and accordingly revised.
2. A model(s) of the system being managed.
3. A range of management choices.
4. Monitoring and evaluation of outcomes.
5. A mechanism(s) for incorporating learning into future decisions.
6. A collaborative structure for stakeholder participation and learning.
Meaning of symbols:
▪ = discussed in detail/demonstrated/performed in paper or case study reviewed by paper.
▪ = mentioned or recommended but not explicitly carried out.
1083I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Table 5
Adaptive management application papers
Application
area
Topic Methods/tools Funding agencies Elements of AM Citation
1 23456
Fisheries Importance of learning in the risk management
process with a case study involving water use
for fisheries and hydroelectric power in Canada
Treating learning as an objective in
collaborative stakeholder groups
University of British Columbia;
Decision Research
▪▪ ▪▪ McDaniels and
Gregory, 2004
Cooperation between small-scale users and
management agencies in salmon management
in British Columbia
Data sharing, building institutional
capacity
Simon Fraser University ▪ ▪ Pinkerton, 1999
Prevention of shocks to developing fishery
populations through adaptive management
Adequate monitoring of biological and
economic fishery data
University of Washington;
South Pacific Commission, New Caledonia
▪▪▪ Hilborn and
Sibert, 1988
Simulation of adaptive management strategies for the
reintroduction of trout cod
Stochastic population model,
simulated monitoring uncertainty
Cooperative Research Center
for Freshwater Ecology
▪ ▪▪▪ ▪▪ Bearlin et al., 2002
Simulating active vs. passive adaptive fisheries
management in the Philippines
Ecological modeling software Bedford Institute of
Oceanography, Canada
▪▪▪ Bundy, 2004
The Decision Analysis and Adaptive
Management (DAAM) Project and the Lake Erie
walleye and yellow perch fisheries
Decision analysis to rank management
alternatives and quantify uncertainty;
adaptive management to reduce uncertainty
University of Guelph, Ontario ▪▪▪▪▪ Nudds et al.,
2003
Coastal and
marine
ecosystems
Wetland and finfish restoration Restoration success index, passive
adaptive management with thresholds
for enacting pre-planned corrective measures
Public Service Electric and Gas Company ▪▪ Weinstein et al.,
1997
Restoration of salt hay farm wetlands on the
Delaware River Estuary
Evaluation of alternative channel
construction techniques
American Society of Civil
Engineers
▪ ▪▪ Weishar and Teal,
1998
Management of economic, environmental, social,
and political aspects of large marine ecosystems
Five-module assessment and
management methodology
Coastal and marine ecosystems ▪▪ Duda and
Sherman, 2002
Forest and
terrestrial
ecosystems
Modeling and selection of management plan for
forest in west-central Alberta, Canada
Computer simulation of forest
management scenarios
Alberta Health and Wellness;
Millar Western Forest
Products; Environment Canada; West Fraser
Mills; Alberta Environment
▪▪▪▪ ▪ van Damme et al.,
2003
Decision-making related to forest road
deactivation in unstable terrain
Risk analysis Forest Renewal British Columbia ▪▪▪ Allison et al.,
2004
The need to consider pathogens, pests, and diseases
in the adaptive management of forests
Computer modeling of pathogen
distribution
National Research Foundation;
Human Resource and
Industrial Program; South
African Forestry Industry
▪ van Staden
et al., 2004
New system of environmental evaluation and
its application in the Southern Appalachians
Novel environmental valuation system National Science Foundation; Environmental
Protection Agency
▪▪▪ ▪ ▪ Norton and
Steinemann, 2001
Management of oaks and pines in the Wisconsin
Necedah National Wildlife Refuge
Adaptive management framework University of Wisconsin;
Necedah National
Wildlife Refuge
▪ ▪▪▪ ▪ ▪ Haney and
Power, 1996
Evaluation of management of Costa Rican and
Nicaraguan forests
Focus on the need for adaptive
management
CA TIE/FINIDA Research Fund; Center for
International Forestry Research
▪▪▪ McGinley and
Finegan, 2003
Ecosystem model-building for management of Southern
bottomland hardwood forests
Delphi method of surveying experts USDA Forest Service;
Alabama Agricultural Experiment Station
▪ Bliss et al.,
1997
Florida
Everglades
Adaptive management as a way to obtain the
knowledge necessary for Everglades restoration
Ecological learning University of Florida ▪ ▪▪ Kiker et al.,
2001
Adaptive management in the Central and
Southern Florida Project Comprehensive Review Study,
a plan for restoration of the Florida Everglades
Review University of California at Berkeley
School of Law
▪▪▪▪ V oss, 2000
1084 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Use of risk assessment and adaptive management in the
Everglades and South Florida ecosystems and the
Central and Southern Florida Project Comprehensive
Review Study
Risk-based conceptual model University of Miami; United States Geological
Society; South Florida Water Management
District; Harwell Gentile and Associates
▪ ▪▪ Gentile et al.,
2001
Rivers, other
freshwater
areas, and
estuaries
Implementation of local watershed council
management practices through adaptive management
Community-based conservation Science to Achieve Results Graduate
Fellowship, United States Environmental
Protection Agency
▪ ▪ ▪▪ ▪ Habron, 2003
Assessment of information needed for environmental
flow allocation, Lachlan River, New South
Wales, Australia
Assessment of information needs for adaptive
management
Macquarie University; Land and Water
Resources Research and Development
Corporation Project MQU6
▪ Hillman and
Brierly, 2002
Gaps that hinder groundwater resource management
in New Zealand
Case study New Zealand Ministry of the Environment ▪▪ ▪ Lowry et al., 2003
Application of the Plan for Analyzing and Testing
Hypotheses (PA TH) to the management of Snake
River basin salmon stocks
Interagency collaboration, development of
common data sets, reduction of uncertainty
Bonneville Power Administration ▪▪ ▪ ▪▪ Marmorek and
Peters, 2001
Wildlife
management
Applying adaptive management to regulating
waterfowl harvest
Passive and active adaptation algorithms United States Fish and Wildlife Service;
United States Geological Survey
▪▪ Johnson and
Williams, 1999
Adaptive management of the species kokako to
determine the effects of pests on population density
V ariation of pest populations, monitoring of
experimental and control areas, statistical
analyses
Department of Conservation, New Zealand;
Foundation for Research, Science, and
Technology, New Zealand
▪▪ ▪ Innes et al., 1999
Conservation of biodiversity during natural gas
exploration in Peru
Adaptive management with comprehensive
monitoring
Smithsonian Institution;
Shell International Limited
▪ ▪ ▪▪▪ Dallmeier et al.,
2002
Integration of adaptive management strategies into
habitat conservation plans
Incentives for adaptive management in HCPs Washington Department of Natural Resources;
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife
▪▪▪▪ Wilhere, 2002
Framework for conservation of biodiversity using
adaptive management to develop knowledge and skills
V arious protection and management, law and
policy, education and awareness, and incentive-
changing strategies
Foundations of Success;
Wildlife Conservation Society
▪▪ ▪▪ Salafsky et al.,
2002
Remediation Modeling of rehabilitation of Cooum River,
Chennai, India
Conceptual model building through workshops Madras –Waterloo University Linkage
Program; CUC-AIT
▪▪▪ ▪ Bunch and
Dudycha, 2004
Restoration of damaged wetlands at San Diego Bay Focus on mitigation compliance San Diego State University ▪▪▪ Zedler, 1997
General
adaptive
management
Models of optimization for harvesting policies for
exploited populations
Theoretical adaptive optimization techniques National Research Council,
Canada; Environment Canada; International
Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
▪ ▪ ▪▪ Walters and
Hilborn, 1978
Gaps in the science base needed for ecological
management, including gaps in adaptive
management
Incentivizing cooperation USDA Forest Service; Natural Resources
Conservation Service; OMB; EPA; NOAA;
US Army Corps of Engineers;
US Department of Interior; Office of Science
and Technology Policy
▪▪ ▪ Szaro et al., 1998
Principles of public involvement in
adaptive management
Six propositions for integrating citizens into
adaptive management
People and Natural Resources Program of the
Pacific Northwest Research Station, USDA
Forest Service
▪ Shindler and
Aldred Cheek,
1999
Case studies of adaptive management related
to land use, water quality, and recreational access
Software for policy option analysis Macquarie University; Wyong Shire Council;
University of Sydney
▪▪ ▪ ▪ Gilmour et al.,
1999
Framework for adaptive ecological management
and lessons learned from prior adaptive
management attempts
Adaptive management framework
from Nyberg, 1999
Society for Ecological Restoration International ▪ ▪▪▪▪ Murray and
Marmorek, 2003
1085I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Table 6
Adaptive management review papers
Application area Topic Methods/tools Funding agencies Elements of AM Citation
1 23456
Fisheries Use of adaptive management to reduce uncertainty in
fishery management and experiences with the
Atlantic Canada groundfishery
Review of case studies Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research
Council of Canada
▪▪ ▪ ▪ Charles, 1998
Discussion of gap between experimental marine ecology
and fishery management; adaptive management as tool
to bridge gap
Review Presidential Chair in Science
(Chile); Pew Charitable Fund
Fellowship
▪ ▪▪▪ Castilla, 2000
Coastal and marine
ecosystems
Formal integration of adaptive management in coastal
restoration through the Coastal Wetlands Planning,
Protection, and Restoration
Act (CWPPRA)
Reviews CWPPRA Louisiana Department of
Natural Resources
▪▪▪ Steyer and
Llewellyn, 2000
Forest and terrestrial
ecosystems
Relationship between forests, agroforestry, biodiversity
and using adaptive management to balance the three
Six key elements to biodiversity
preservation in forests
The World Conservation
Union
▪ McNeeley, 2004
Decision support systems for federal forests
in the United States
Decision support system software USDA Forest Service ▪▪ ▪ Rauscher, 1999
Florida Everglades Uncertainty and the need for flexibility in adaptive Florida
Everglades management
Stakeholder flexibility John D. and Catherine T.
MacArthur Foundation;
Sustainable Everglades
Initiative
▪ Gunderson,
1999
Rivers, other
freshwater areas,
and estuaries
Gaps in knowledge about salinity management for
freshwater biota
Review Murray –Darling Basin
Commission; National
Action Plan Non-regional
Foundation Funding
▪ James et al.,
2003
Evaluation of estuary management through the
National Estuary Program
National Estuary Program's Management
Conference process
NOAA ▪▪ Imperial et al.,
1993
Problems with implementing adaptive management
in riparian ecosystems
Review/synthesis discusses challenges in each area Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research
Council, Canada
▪▪▪ ▪ Walters, 1997
Adaptive co-management for freshwater resource
management
Involving multiple groups as decision-makers
with co-management
FORMAS, the Swedish
Research Council for
Environment, Agricultural
Sciences and Spatial Planning.
▪ ▪ Folke, 2003
Wildlife
management
Integration of wildlife management and research
through adaptive management
Hypothetico-deductive science,
learning as an objective
North Carolina State University;
Colorado Division of Wildlife;
National Biological Service;
Utah State University;
United States Forest Service;
University of Guelph; Missouri
Department of Conservation
▪ ▪ ▪▪ Lancia et al.,
1996
Use of adaptive management in managing
human–carnivore interaction
Behavior modification; isolation of humans
from carnivores
Conservation International;
Wildlife Conservation Society
▪ ▪ Treves and
Karanth, 2003
General adaptive
management
Review of twenty-seven methodologies for assessment
of management of protected areas
Collection of quantitative data from monitoring and
qualitative data from scoring by managers and stakeholders
WWF/IUCN Forest
Innovations Project
▪ Hockings, 2003
Framework for assessing the effectiveness of management
of protected areas
“Measures of Success ” framework developed by
The Nature Conservancy and its partners
The Nature Conservancy ▪ Parrish et al.,
2003
Adaptive management as a decision-making approach
for resource management agencies
Experiments utilizing similar small ecosystems United States
Geological Survey
▪ ▪▪▪ ▪ ▪ Johnson, 1999
1086 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

revisitation of objectives, can be limited. NOAA has used
adaptive management in projects such as shore restoration in the
Pacific Northwest, the restoration of native plant species in a
Rhode Island marsh, and also in larger projects such as the
Louisiana coastal wetlands, where there is again an emphasis on
learning through monitoring ( NOAA, 2004b ).
Adaptive management is also working its way into other US
agencies and departments. Although the Department of
Energy's NEPA Task Force report “Modernizing NEPA
Implementation” (DOE, 2003 ) finds that the department could
employ adaptive management to a much greater extent, the
DOE already uses it in managing the environmental effects of
hydroelectricity production. One example is the adaptive
management plan for balancing salmon conservation with
electricity production in the Columbia River basin of Washing-
ton state ( DOE, 1998), which emphasizes the use and continual
refinement of advanced mathematical models. More generally,
the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) may
choose to expedite license issuance for power plant construction
under the condition that adaptive management be used at the
site ( FERC, 2000 ).
V arying elements of adaptive management have been
implemented in Canada as well. Fisheries and Oceans Canada
has advanced a socioeconomic framework for ecosystem-based
fisheries management ( Rudd, 2004 ), and Environment Canada
has recommended adaptive management in general to compen-
sate for humans' lack of complete understanding of complex
ecosystems ( Environment Canada, 2004a ). It is on the
provincial level, though, where we see the greatest use of
adaptive management. British Columbia has thorough guides to
adaptive management published locally ( Nyberg, 1999; Taylor
et al., 1997 ), and the British Columbia Forest Service is
currently implementing many pilot adaptive management
projects, including adaptive management of livestock grazing,
riverbanks and streambanks, forest recreation sites, and grizzly
bear habitat, among others ( BCFS, 2000 ).
Many international agencies and organizations also call for
the use of adaptive management in environmental policy. In the
European Union, the Commission of the European Communi-
ties and the World Wildlife Federation both recognize adaptive
management as a potential solution for managing over-
harvested fisheries stocks ( CEC, 2001; WWF, 2001a ). The
Biodiversity Support Program has published a general guide to
adaptive management that explicitly relates adaptive manage-
ment to the scientific method and emphasizes learning and
reducing uncertainty ( WWF, 2001b). Additionally, the RAND
Corporation ( Lempert et al., 2003 ) recommends computer
modeling and adaptive management in general as a way to help
conduct long-term policy analysis.
7. Integration of adaptive management with multi-criteria
decision analysis
As we have stated in our review, unlike traditional
management schemes designed to find and follow the optimal
remedial strategy, adaptive management acknowledges our
inability to predict system evolution in response to changing
physical environments and social pressures. Our review
indicates that the concept of adaptive management is well
respected in academia, and many government agencies have
recommended it for application. Yet even though many papers
acknowledge that effective environmental decision-making
requires considering the environmental, ecological, technolog-
ical, economic, and socio-political factors relevant to evaluating
and selecting a management alternative, these factors are rarely
considered in concert and decisions are often driven by just one
aspect of the problem. The quantitative tools and methods for
implementing adaptive management strategies are not system-
atized, and no framework is available for integration and
organization of the people, processes, and tools required to
make structured and defensible environmental management
decisions.
We believe that a combination of adaptive management and
MCDA will provide a powerful framework for a wide range of
environmental management problems. It will allow both
structured, clear decisions to be made and also the adjustment
of those decisions based on their performance. The MCDA
framework proposed in Linkov et al. (2004) and in many other
papers incorporates feedback loops between each step of the
process that leads to the selection of an alternative. Adoption of
adaptive management views will allow an iterative application
of the MCDA framework and, once an alternative is chosen,
adding a feedback loop will allow the re-ranking of alternatives
as well as goals and criteria weightings.
A general decision framework ( Fig. 4) is intended to provide
a road map to the environmental decision-making process.
Having the right combination of people is the first essential
element in the decision process. The activity and involvement
levels of three basic groups of people (decision-makers,
scientists and engineers, and stakeholders) are symbolized in
Fig. 4 by dark lines for direct involvement and dotted lines for
less direct involvement. While the actual membership and the
function of these three groups may overlap or vary, the roles of
each are essential in maximizing the utility of human input into
the decision process. Each group has its own way of viewing the
world, its own method of envisioning solutions, and its own
societal responsibility. Policy- and decision-makers spend most
of their effort defining the problem's context and the overall
constraints on the decision. In addition, they may be responsible
for the final decision and subsequent policy implementation.
Stakeholders may help define the problem, but they contribute
the most in helping to formulate performance criteria and
contributing value judgments for weighting the various success
criteria. Depending on the problem and regulatory context,
stakeholders may have some responsibility in ranking and
selecting the final option. Scientists and engineers have the most
focused role in that they provide the measurements or
estimations of the desired criteria that determine the success
of various alternatives. While they may take a secondary role as
stakeholders or decision-makers, their primary role is, to the
best of their abilities, to provide the technical input necessary
for the decision process.
The decision-making process is in the center of the figure.
While it is reasonable to expect that the process may vary in
1087I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

specific details among regulatory programs and project types,
emphasis should be given to designing an adaptive management
structure so that participants can modify aspects of the project to
suit local concerns while still producing a structure that provides
the required outputs. The process depicted in Fig. 4 follows two
basic activities: 1) generating management alternatives, success
criteria, and value judgments and 2) ranking the alternatives by
applying value weights. The first part of the process generates
and defines choices, performance levels, and preferences. The
latter section methodically prunes non-feasible alternatives by
first applying screening mechanisms (for example, overall cost,
technical feasibility, or general societal acceptance) followed by
a more detailed ranking of the remaining options by decision
analytical techniques (AHP , MAUT, or outranking) that utilize
the various criteria levels generated by environmental tools,
monitoring, or stake-holder surveys.
As shown in Fig. 4 , the tools used within group decision-
making and scientific research are essential elements of the
overall decision process. As with the involvement of different
groups of people, tool applicability is symbolized by solid lines
(direct or high utility) and dotted lines (indirect or lower utility).
Decision analysis tools help to generate and map preferences of
stakeholder groups as well as individual value judgments into
organized structures that can be linked with the other technical
tools from risk analysis, modeling and monitoring, and cost
estimations. Decision analysis software can also provide useful
graphical techniques and visualization methods to express the
gathered information in understandable formats. When changes
occur in the requirements or the decision process, decision
analysis tools can respond efficiently to reprocess and iterate
with the new inputs. The framework depicted in Fig. 4 provides
a focused role for the detailed scientific and engineering efforts
invested in experimentation, environmental monitoring, and
modeling that provide the rigorous and defendable details for
evaluating criteria performance under various alternatives. This
integration of decision tools and scientific and engineering tools
allows each to have a unique and valuable role in the decision
process without attempting to apply either type of tool beyond
its intended scope.
As with most other decision processes reviewed, it is
assumed that the framework in Fig. 4 is iterative at each phase
and can be cycled through many times in the course of complex
decision-making. A first-pass effort may efficiently point out
challenges that may occur, key stakeholders to be included, or
modeling studies that should be initiated. As these challenges
become more apparent one iterates again through the frame-
work to explore and adapt the process to address the more subtle
aspects of the decision, with each iteration giving an indication
of additional details that would benefit the overall decision
process.
8. Application of MCDA/adaptive management framework
to New Y ork/New Jersey Harbor
The New York/New Jersey Harbor case study is a good
example application of the combined multi-criteria decision
analysis and adaptive management framework. The compara-
tive risk assessment presented above covered the first three
steps of the process identified in Fig. 4 (that is, problem
formulation and alternative generation, criteria identification,
Fig. 4. Adaptive decision framework. Solid lines represent direct involvement for people or utilization of tools; dashed lines represent less direct involvement or utilization.
1088 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

and evaluating performance of alternatives on the criteria). As
we noted earlier, the fourth step (gathering value judgments on
the relative importance of each criterion) is addressed only
qualitatively within a CRA framework.
Kiker and Bridges (submitted for publication) present an
example MCDA assessment of this NY/NJ case. Criterium
Decision Plus software ( InfoHarvest, 2004 )w a su s e dt o
implement a SMART/MAUT approach to quantitatively incor-
porate stakeholder value judgments on criteria along with
technical measures for specific criteria weighting. V alue judg-
ments on the importance of the seven decision criteria were
elicited from a group of individuals experienced in the area of
dredged material assessment and management in the US EP A, US
Army Corps of Engineers and Academia using a “swing”
weighting technique (discussed in more detail in Kiker and
Bridges, submitted for publication ). Fig. 5 a shows an example
ranking of five alternatives fromKiker and Bridges (submitted for
publication) from one set of surveyed weights. The contained
aquatic disposal (CAD) alternative is the most preferable because
of its comparatively low cost and human health and ecological
risks. A landfill is ranked second due to its relatively good risk
reduction and public acceptability.Kiker and Bridges (submitted
for publication) present more discussion on the results and their
sensitivity to changing weights and value judgments.
In this framework, adaptive management considerations which
call for a change in management strategy do not require expensive
reevaluation of the whole decision model. For example, the cost
of CAD operation may increase with time, and the relative safety
of the CAD cell may become lower when it is getting close to its
capacity. In this situation, revised cost and risk data can be easily
incorporated into the decision model and tested for potential
change in overall ranking given a variety of decision-relevant
scenarios. These various conditions could relate to uncertainties in
monitored data, stakeholder weights or values, or various “what-
if” style scenarios. Fig. 5 b shows a different criteria weighting
scheme that results from the same decision model, but with
different cost and risk data. The second scheme shows a different
rank ordering of the management strategies, this time with a
landfill topping the list. This example shows that under some
criteria weights, monitoring values, and stakeholder valuations,
rankings may change. InFig. 5b, while the exact ranking changes,
the upper three alternatives remain unchanged. This additional
information may allow decision-makers and stakeholders to plan
adaptively towards several generally-favored alternatives while
discarding others that do not have consistently higher rankings
over a variety of conditions. Thus, the MCDA structure, encom-
passing risk-based and other decision-relevant criteria, could
efficiently assist the decision-makers as they construct adaptive
strategies for monitoring and managing the contaminated
sediments in the Harbor.
9. Discussion/conclusion
We are not the first to propose an integration of decision
analysis methods with adaptive management. For example,
Rauscher et al. (2000) propose a combination of the analytical
hierarchy process and adaptive management. Pastorok et al.
(1997) develop a decision-making framework combined with
Fig. 5. Comparison of sediment management alternative scores when criteria weightings or related information change.
1089I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

monitoring and adaptive management. Additionally,Nudds et al.
(2003) with the University of Guelph Decision Analysis and
Adaptive Management Project are applying a combination of
methods to the management of yellow perch and walleye in Lake
Erie. Their system emphasizes decision analysis, placing adaptive
management in its service as a method to reduce the uncertainty
present in decision calculations. Our proposed method, on the
other hand, uses adaptive management as an overall planning and
procedural framework, and we recommend decision analysis to
help make structured, logical decisions concerning management
options. We believe that our method will prove most fruitful, and
we believe that our current review provides the most rigorous and
justifiable foundation to date for successful application of the
combined concept for environmental management of a wide
range of projects. Using adaptive management and multi-criteria
decision analysis gives structure to the decision-making process
and allows the manager to learn about the system being managed
and modify the management strategy based on new knowledge.
Such a framework could be of great assistance to managers,
saving them both time and resources as it helps them to understand
the trade-offs involved between different management alterna-
tives and to make justified, informed decisions.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to Drs. Seager, Ganoulis, Cooke,
Small, V alverde, Y oe, Sullivan, and Gardner for useful sugges-
tions. Support for this study was provided by the USACE Dred-
ging Operations and Environmental Research (DOER) (GAK, IL,
FKS, CB, TSB) and NOAA through the Cooperative Institute for
Coastal and Estuarine Environmental Technology (IL). Permission
was granted by the Chief of Engineers to publish this material.
References
Accorsi R, Apostolakis GE, Zio E. Prioritizing stakeholder concerns in
environmental risk management. J Risk Res 1999a;2(1):11 –29.
Accorsi R, Zio E, Apostolakis GE. Developing utility functions for
environmental decision-making. Prog Nucl. Energy 1999b;34(4):387 –411.
Allison C, Sidle RC, Tait D. Application of decision analysis to forest road
deactivation in unstable terrain. Environ Manage 2004;33:173 –85.
Al-Rashdan D, Al-Kloub B, Dean A, Al-Shemmeri TT. Environmental impact
assessment and ranking the environmental projects in Jordan. Eur J Oper Res
1999;18:30–45.
Andrews CJ, Apul DS, Linkov I. Comparative risk assessment: past experience,
current trends and future directions. In: Linkov I, Ramadan A, editors.
Comparative Risk Assessment and Environmental Decision Making.
Amsterdam: Kluwer; 2004.
Apostolakis GE. Expert judgment resolution in technically-intensive policy
disputes. In: Linkov I, Palma-Oliveira J, editors. Assessment and management
of environmental risks: cost-efficient methods and applications. Proceedings of
the NA TO Advanced Research WorkshopBoston, MA, USA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers; 2001. p. 211–20.
Arvai J, Gregory R. Testing alternative decision approaches for identifying cleanup
priorities at contaminated sites. Environ Sci Technol 2003;37(8):1469–76.
Bearlin AR, Schreiber ESG, Nicol SJ, Starfield AM, Todd CR. Identifying the
weakest link: simulating adaptive management of the reintroduction of a
threatened fish. Can J Fish Aquat Sci 2002;59:1709 –16.
Bella A, Duckstein L, Szidarovszky F. A multicriterion analysis of the water
allocation conflict in the upper Rio Grande River basin. Appl Math Comput
1996;77:245–65.
Belton V , Stewart T. Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: an integrated
approach. Boston, MA, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2002.
Bliss JC, Jones SB, Stanturf JA, Burke MK, Hamner CM. Creating a knowledge
base for management of Southern bottomland hardwood ecosystems. USDA
Forest Service, Southern Research Station, General Technical Report SRS-
017; 1997. Available at http://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/pubs/viewpub.jsp?
index=2203. Accessed 22 July 2004.
Bonano EJ, Apostolakis GE, Salter PF, Ghassemi A, Jennings S. Application
of risk assessment and decision analysis to the evaluation, ranking and
selection of environmental remediation alternatives. J Hazard Mater 2000;
71:35–57.
Borsuk M, Clemen RL, Maguire LA, Reckhow K. Stakeholder values and scientific
modeling in the Neuse River watershed. Group Decis Negot 2001;10:355–73.
Bridges T, Kiker G, Cura J, Apul D, Linkov I. Towards using comparative risk
assessment to manage contaminated sediments. In: Levner E, Linkov I,
Proth JM, editors. Strategic Management of Marine Ecosystems. Amster-
dam: Springer; 2005.
British Columbia Forest Service (BCFS); 2000. http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfp/
amhome/am_case_studies.htm. Accessed 17 September 2004.
British Columbia Ministry of Sustainable Resource Management (BCMSRM).
North Coast land and resource management plan: final recommenda-
tions; 2004. http://srmwww.gov.bc.ca/ske/lrmp/ncoast/docs/NCLRMP_
Recommendations_Draft_4.pdf. Accessed 28 September 2004.
Bunch MJ, Dudycha DJ. Linking conceptual and simulation models of the
Cooum River: collaborative dev elopment of a GIS-based DSS for
environmental management. Comput Environ Urban Syst 2004;28:247 –64.
Bundy A. The ecological effects of fishing and implications for coastal
management in San Miguel Bay, the Philippines. Coast Manage 2004;
32:25–38.
Brown K, Adger NW, Tompkins E, Bacon P , Shim D, Y oung K. Trade-off
analysis for marine protected area management. Ecol Econ 2001;37:417–34.
Bureau of Land Management; 2003. http://www.mt.blm.gov/oilgas/policy/
im2003-234.pdf. Accessed 28 September 2004.
Castilla JC. Roles of experimental marine ecology in coastal management and
conservation. J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 2000;250:3 –21.
CCC. Procedural Guidance For Evaluating Wetland Mitigation Projects In
California's Coastal Zone, California Coastal Commission, September; 1995.
http://www.coastal.ca.gov/weteval/wetitle.html.
CCHO, Health Canada. Climate Change and Health Economic Advisory Panel’s
Final Report on Health Impacts of the Greenhouse Gases Mitigation
Measures; 2000. http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hecs-sesc/ccho/publications/
greenhouse_gases/toc.htm. Accessed 17 September 2004.
Charles A T. Living with uncertainty in fisheries: analytical methods, management
priorities and the Canadian groundfishery experience. Fish Res 1998;37:
37–50.
Commission of the European Communities (CEC). Green Paper on the Future of
the Common Fisheries Policy; 2001. http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/en/com/
gpr/2001/com2001_0135en01.pdf. Accessed 17 September 2004.
Dallmeier F, Alonso A, Jones M. Planning an adaptive management process for
biodiversity conservation and resource development in the Camisea River
basin. Environ Monit Assess 2002;76(1):1 –17.
DOE. Comprehensive Land-Use Planning Process Guide; 1996. http://www.sc.
doe.gov/SC-80/pdf_file/gpg33.pdf. Accessed 20 September 2004.
DOE. Adaptive Management Platform for Natural Resources in the Columbia River
Basin; 2002. http://www.pnl.gov/main/publications/external/technical_reports/
PNNL-13875.pdf. Accessed 28 September 2004.
DOE. The NEPA Task Force Report to the Council on Environmental Quality:
Modernizing NEPA Imp lementation; 2003. http://ceq.eh.doe.gov/ntf/report/
finalreport.pdf. Accessed 20 September 2004.
DOI. Departmental Manual; 2004. http://elips.doi.gov/elips/release/3614.htmand
http://elips.doi.gov/elips/release/3611.htm. Accessed 29 September 2004.
Doley TM, Benelmoouffok D, Deschaine LM. Decision support for optimal
watershed load allocation. Paper presented at the Society for Modeling and
Simulation International Conference Seattle, USA; 2001. Apr 22 –26.
Driscoll SBK, Wickwire TW, Cura JJ, V orhees DJ, Butler CL, Moore DW, et al.
A comparative screening-level ecological and human health risk assessment
for dredged material management alternatives in New York/New Jersey
harbor. Hum Ecol Risk Assess 2002;8: 603 –26.
1090 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Duda A, Sherman K. A new imperative for improving management of large
marine ecosystems. Ocean Coast Manag 2002;45:797 –833.
Environment Canada; 2004a. http://www.bco.ec.gc.ca/en/primers/ecosystem.
cfm. Accessed 17 September 2004.
Environment Canada. Environmental Assessment Best Practice Guide for
Wildlife at Risk in Canada; 2004b. http://www.cwsscf.ec.gc.ca/publications/
AbstractTemplate.cfm?lang=e&id=1059. Accessed 17 September 2004.
Environment Canada. Canada’s National Wildlife Disease Strategy; 2004c.http://
www.cws-scf.ec.gc.ca/cnwds/draft11.pdf.A c c e s s e d2 0S e p t e m b e r2 0 0 4 .
EPA. Integrated Assessment of Hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico; 1999a.
http://www.epa.gov/msbasin/ia/index.html. Accessed 17 September 2004.
EPA. Protocol for Developing Sediment TMDLs; 1999b. http://www.epa.gov/
owow/tmdl/sediment/pdf/sediment.pdf. Accessed 23 September 2004.
EPA. Watershed Analysis and Management Guide for Tribes— Step 5: Adaptive
Management; 2000. http://www.epa.gov/owow/watershed/wacademy/wam/
step5.html. Accessed 17 September 2004.
EPA. Protocol for Developing Pathogen TMDLs; 2001a. http://www.epa.gov/
owow/tmdl/pathogen_all.pdf. Accessed 23 September 2004.
EPA. Action Plan for Reducing, Mitigating, and Controlling Hypoxia in the
Northern Gulf of Mexico; 2001b. http://www.epa.gov/msbasin/actionplan.
htm. Accessed 29 September 2004.
EPA. Lake Superior Lakewide Management Plan (LaMP) 2000; 2002. http://
www.epa.gov/glnpo/lakesuperior/lamp2000/. Accessed 17 September 2004.
EPA. Using Dynamic Filed Activities for On-Site Decision Making: A Guide for
Project Managers; 2003. http://www.epa.gov/sup erfund/programs/dfa/
download/guidance/40r03002.pdf. Accessed 3 February 2006.
Fernandes L, Ridgley M, van't Hof T. Multiple criteria analysis integrates
economic, ecological and social objectives for coral reef managers. Coral
Reefs 1999;18(4):393–402.
FERC. Interagency Task Force Report on Improving the Studies Process in
FERC Licensing; 2000. http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/habitat/habitatprotection/
studies_final.pdf. Accessed 20 September 2004.
Focht W, DeShong T, Wood J, Whitaker K. A protocol for the elicitation of
stakeholders' concerns and preferences for incorporation into policy
dialogue. Proceedings of the Third Workshop in the Environmental Policy
and Economics Workshop Series: Economic Research and Policy
Concerning Water Use and Watershed Management. Washington, USA:
US EPA; 1999. p. 1 –24.
Folke C. Freshwater for resilience: a shift in thinking. Phil Trans R Soc Lond
2003;358:2027–36.
Gallego E, Jiménez A, Mateos A, Sazykina T, Ríos-Insua S. Application of
Multiattribute Analysis (MAA) to search for optimum remedial strategies for
contaminated lakes with the MOIRA system. Paper presented at the 11th
annual meeting of the International Radiation Protection Association; 2004.
Madrid, Spain, May 23 –28.
Ganoulis J. Evaluating alternative strategies for wastewater recycling and reuse
in the Mediterranean area. Water Sci Technol Water Supply 2003;3(4): 11–9.
Gentile JH, Harwell MA, Cropper Jr W, Harwell CC, DeAngelis D, Davis S, et
al. Ecological conceptual models: a framework and case study on ecosystem
management for South Florida sustainability. Sci Tot Environ 2001;
274:231–53.
Georgopoulou E, Sarafidis Y , Diakoulaki D. Design and implementation of a
group DSS for sustaining renewable energies exploitation. Eur J Oper Res
1998;109:483–500.
Gilmour A, Walkerden G, Scandol J. Adaptive management of the water cycle
on the urban fringe: three Australian case studies. Conserv Ecol 1999;
3(1):11. Available at http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art11. Accessed
14 July 2004.
Gomez-Limon JA, Arriaza M, Riesgo L. An MCDM analysis of agricultural risk
aversion. Eur J Oper Res; in press.
Gregory R, Failing L. Using decision analysis to encourage sound deliberation:
water use planning in British Columbia, Canada. Professional practice; 2002.
p. 492–9.
Gregory R, Wellman K. Bringing stakeholder values into environmental policy
choices: a community-based estuary case study. Ecol Econ 2001;39:37 –52.
Gregory R, McDaniels T, Fields D. Decision aiding, not dispute resolution:
creating insights through structured environmental decisions. J Policy Anal
Manag 2001;20(3):415–32.
Grelk, BJ. A CERCLA-based decision support system for environmental
remediation strategy selection [thesis]. Department of the Air Force, Air
Force Institute of Technology; 1997.
Grelk B, Kloeber JM, Jackson JA, Deckro RF, Parnell GS. Quantifying
CERCLA using site decision maker values. Remediation 1998;8(2):87–105.
Gunderson L. Resilience, flexibility and adaptive management — antidotes for
spurious certitude? Conserv Ecol 1999;3(1):7. Available at http://www.
consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art7. Accessed 14 July 2004.
Gurocak ER, Whittlesey NK. Multiple criteria decision making: a case study of
the Columbia River salmon recovery plan. Environ Resour Econ 1998;12
(4):479–95.
Habron G. Role of adaptive management for watershed councils. Environ
Manage 2003;3(11):29–41.
Hämäläinen RP , Kettunen E, Ehtamo H, Marttunen M. Evaluating a framework
for multi-stakeholder decision support in water resources management.
Group Decis Negot 2001;10(4):331 –53.
Haney A, Power RL. Adaptive management for sound ecosystem management.
Environ Manage 1996;20(6):879 –86.
Health Canada. Environment Canada Performance Report for the period ending
March 31, 2003; 2003. http://www.ec.gc.ca/dpr/2003/en/c4d.htm.
Herath G. Incorporating community objectives in improved wetland manage-
ment: the use of the analytic hierarchy process. J Environ Manag 2004;70
(3):263–73.
Hilborn R, Sibert J. Adaptive management of developing fisheries. Mar Policy
1988;12:112–21.
Hillman M, Brierly G. Information needs for environmental flow allocation: a
case study from the Lachlan River, New South Wales, Australia. Ann Assoc
Am Geogr 2002;92:617 –30.
Hockings M. Systems for assessing the effectiveness of management in
protected areas. Bioscience 2003;53:823 –32.
Imperial MB, Hennessey T, Robadue Jr D. The evolution of adaptive
management for estuarine ecosystems: the National Estuary Program and
its precursors. Ocean Coast Manag 1993;20:147 –80.
InfoHarvest. Criterium Decision Plus Software V ersion 3.0. www.infoharvest.
com; 2004.
Innes J, Hay R, Flux I, Bradfield P , Speed H, Jansen P . Successful recovery of
North Island kokako Callaeas cinerea wilsoni populations, by adaptive
management. Biol Conserv 1999;87(2):201 –14.
James KR, Cant B, Ryan T. Responses of freshwater biota to rising salinity
levels and implications for saline water management: a review. Aust J Bot
2003;51:703–13.
Joerin F, Musy A. Land management with GIS and multicriteria analysis. Int
Trans Oper Res 2000;7:67 –78.
Johnson BL. Introduction to the special feature: adaptive management —
scientifically sound, socially challenged? Conserv Ecol 1999;3(1):10.
Available at http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art10. Accessed 14 July
2004.
Johnson F, Williams K. Protocol and practice in the adaptive management of
waterfowl harvests. Conserv Ecol 1999;3(1):8. Available at http://www.
consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art8. Accessed 14 July 2004.
Joubert AR, Leiman A, de Klerk HM, Katua S, Aggenbach JC. Fynbos
(fine bush) vegetation and the supply of water: a comparison of multi-
criteria decision analysis and cost –benefit analysis. Ecol Econ 1997;22:
123–40.
Kangas J, Kangas A, Leskinen P , Pykalainen J. MCDM methods in strategic
planning of forestry on state-owned lands in Finland: applications and
experiences. J Multi Criteria Decis Anal 2001;10:257 –71.
Keisler JM, Sundell RC. Combining multi-attribute utility and geographic
information for boundary decisions: an application to park planning. GIDA
1997;1(2):101–18.
Kholghi M. Multi-criterion decision-making tools for wastewater planning
management. J Agric Sci Technol 2001;3:281 –6.
Kiker CF, Milon JW, Hodges AW. Adaptive learning for science-based policy:
the Everglades restoration. Ecol Econ 2001;37:403 –16.
Kiker, GA, Bridges, TS. Integrating Comparative Risk Assessments with Multi-
Criteria Decision Analysis for Dredged Material Management in New York/
New Jersey Harbor. Integrated Environmental Assessment and Manage-
ment; submitted for publication.
1091I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Klauer B, Drechsler M, Messner F. Multi-criteria analysis more under
uncertainty with IANUS — method and empirical results. UFZ discussion
GmbH. Germany: Leipzig; 2002.
Kwak SJ, Yoo SH, Kim TY . A constructive approach to air-quality valuation in
Korea. Ecol Econ 2001;38:327 –44.
Lancia RA, Braun CE, Collopy MW, Dueser RD. ARM! for the future: adaptive
resource management in the wildlife profession. Wildl Soc Bull
1996;24:436–42.
Larichev OI, Olson DL. Multiple criteria analysis in strategic siting problems.
Boston, USA: Kluwer Academic Publishers; 2001.
Lempert R, Popper S, Bankes SC. Shaping the Next One Hundred Y ears: New
Methods for Quantitative, Long-Term Policy Analysis; 2003. http://www.
rand.org/publications/MR/MR1626/. Accessed 28 September 2004.
Levy J, Hipel K, Kilgour DM. Using environmental indicators to quantify the
robustness of policy alternatives to uncertainty. Ecol Model 2000;130:
79–86.
Linkov I, V arghese A, Jamil S, Seager TP , Kiker G, Bridges T. Multi-criteria
decision analysis: framework for applications in remedial planning for
contaminated sites. In: Linkov I, Ramadan A, editors. Comparative Risk
Assessment and Environmental Decision Making. Amsterdam: Kluwer;
2004. p. 15 –54.
Lowry TS, Bright JC, Close ME, Robb CA, White PA, Cameron SG.
Management gaps analysis: a case study of groundwater resource
management in New Zealand. Water Resour Dev 2003;19:579 –92.
Mardle S, Pascoe S. Modeling the effects of trade-offs between long and short-
term objectives in fisheries management. J Environ Manag 2002;65:
49–62.
Mardle S, Pascoe S, Herrero I. Management objective importance in fisheries:
an evaluation using the analytic hierarchy process (AHP). Environ Manag
2004;33(1):1–11.
Marmorek D, Peters C. Finding a PA TH toward scientific collaboration: insights
from the Columbia River Basin. Conserv Ecol 2001;5(2):8. Available at
http://www.consecol.org/vol5/iss2/art8. Accessed 9 February 2005.
Marttunen M, Hämäläinen RP . Decision analysis interviews in environmental
impact assessment. Eur J Oper Res 1995;87(3):551 –63.
McDaniels TL. Using judgment in resource management: an analysis of a
fisheries management decision. Oper Res 1995;43(3):415 –26.
McDaniels T. A decision analysis of the Tatshenshini-Alsek Wilderness
Preservation alternatives. J Environ Manag 1999;19(3):498 –510.
McDaniels TL, Gregory R. Learning as an objective within a structured risk
management decision process. Environ Sci Technol 2004;38:1921 –6.
McGinley K, Finegan B. The ecological sustainability of tropical forest
management: evaluation of the national forest management standards of
Costa Rica and Nicaragua, with emphasis on the need for adaptive
management. For Pol Econ 2003;5(4):421 –31.
McNeeley JA. Nature vs. nurture: managing relationships between forests,
agroforestry and wild biodiversity. Agrofor Syst 2004;61:155 –65.
Mendoza GA, Anderson AB (US Army ERDC), Gertner GZ. Integrating multi-
criteria analysis and GIS for land condition assessment: Part 2 — allocation
of military training areas. GIDA 2002;6(1):17 –30.
Merritt M. Strategic plan for salmon research in the Kuskokwim River drainage.
Special publication, vol. 01-07. Alaska Department of Fish and Game,
Division of Sport Fish; 2001.
Mimi ZA, Sawalhi BI. A decision tool for allocating the waters of the Jordan
River Basin between all riparian parties. Water Resour Manag 2003;
17:447–61.
Murray C, Marmorek D. Adaptive management and ecological restoration. In:
Friederici P , editor. Ecological Restoration of Southwestern Ponderosa Pine
Forests: A Sourcebook for Research and Application. Washington, DC:
Island Press; 2003. p. 417 –28.
Ni JR, Borthwick AGL, Qin HP . Integrated approach to determining
postreclamation coastlines. J Environ Eng 2002;128(6):543 –51.
Ning SK, Chang N. Multi-objective, decision-based assessment of a water
quality monitoring network in a river system. J Environ Monit 2002;4:121–6.
NRC (National Research Council). Environmental Cleanup at Navy Facilities.
Committee on Environmental Remediation at Naval Facilities, Water
Science and Technology Board, Division on Earth and Life Studies.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2003.
Nyberg B. An Introductory Guide to Adaptive Management for Project Leaders
and Participants, Forest Practices Branch, British Columbia Forest Service;
1999.
NOAA. Coastal Restoration — Adaptive Management; 2004a. http://www.csc.
noaa.gov/coastal/management/management.htm. Accessed 17 September
2004.
NOAA. Coastal Restoration — Innovative and Successful Monitoring and
Adaptive Management Approaches; 2004b. http://www.csc.noaa.gov/
coastal/management/monitor.htm. Accessed 17 September 2004.
NOAA. Landscape Characterization and Restoration (LCR) Program — Habitat
Restoration; 2004c. http://www.csc.noaa.gov/lcr/text/confsumm.html .
Accessed 29 September 2004.
Norton BG, Steinemann AC. Environmental values and adaptive management.
Environ V alues 2001;10(4):473–506.
Nudds T, Jiao Y , Crawford S, Reid K, McCann K, Yang W. The DAAM Project—
Decision Analysis and Adaptive Management (DAAM) Systems for
Great Lakes Fisheries: The Lake Erie Walleye and Y ellow Perch Fisheries
Project Background and Work Plan; 2003. http://www.ocfa.on.ca/PICS/
DAAM_backgrounder_2003_11_26.pdf . Accessed 9 February 2005.
ODPM (Office of the Deputy Prime Minister). DLTR multi-criteria decision
analysis manual; 2004. Available at http://www.odpm.gov.uk/stellent/
groups/odpm_about/documents/page/odpm_about_608524-02.hcsp.
Özelkan EC, Duckstein L. Analyzing water resources alternatives and handling
criteria by multi criterion decision techniques. J Environ Manag 1996;48
(1):69–96.
Parrish JD, Braun DP , Unnasch RS. Are we conserving what we say we are?
Measuring ecological integrity with in protected areas. Bioscience
2003;53:851–60.
Parnell GS, Frimpon M, Barnes J, Kloeber Jr JM, Deckro RF, Jackson JA.
Safety risk analysis of an innovative environmental technology. Risk Anal
2001;21(1):143–55.
Pastorok RA, McDonald A, Sampson JR, Wilber P . An ecological decision
framework for environmental restoration projects. Ecol Eng 1997;9:89–107.
Pavlou SP , Stansbury JS. Risk-cost trade off considerations for contaminated
sediment disposal. Hum Ecol Risk Assess 1998;4(4):991 –1002.
Peterson D, Silsbee D, Schmoldt D. A case study of resources management
planning with multiple objectives and projects. Environ Manage 1994;18(5):
729–42.
Pinkerton E. Factors in overcoming barriers to implementing co-management in
British Columbia salmon fisheries. Conserv Ecol 1999;3(2):2. Available at
http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss2/art2. Accessed 15 July 2004.
Prato T. Multiple attribute evaluation of ecosystem management for the Missouri
River. Ecol Econ 2003;45:297 –309.
Qin HP , Ni JR, Borthwick AGL. Harmonized optimal postreclamation coastline
for Deep Bay, China. J Environ Eng 2002;128(6):552 –61.
Rauscher HM. Ecosystem management decision support for federal forests in
the United States: a review. For Ecol Manag 1999;114:173 –97.
Rauscher HM, Lloyd FT, Loftis DL, Twery MJ. A practical decision-analysis
process for forest ecosystem management. Comput Electron Agric 2000;27:
195–226.
Rogers SH, Seager TP , Gardner KH. Combining expert judgment and
stakeholder values with Promethee: a case study in contaminated sediments
management. In: Linkov I, Bakr Ramadan A, editors. Comparative risk
assessment and environmental decision making. Boston, MA, USA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers; 2004. p. 305 –22.
Ríos-Insua S, Gallego E, Mateos A, Jiménez A. A decision support system for
ranking countermeasures for radionuclide contaminated aquatic ecosystems:
The MOIRA project; 2002. p. 283 –97.
Rudd MA. An institutional framework for designing and monitoring ecosystem-
based fisheries management policy experiments. Ecol Econ 2004;48:
109–24.
Salafsky N, Margoluis R, Redford KH, Robinson JG. Improving the practice of
conservation: a conceptual framework and research agenda for conservation
science. Conserv Biol 2002;16(6):1469 –79.
Satterstrom K, Linkov I, Kiker G, Ferguson E, Bridges T. Multi-criteria decision
analysis and adaptive management: a review and framework for application
to superfund sites. In: Macey GP , Cannon J, editors. Reclaiming the Land:
Rethinking Superfund Institutions, Methods, and Practices. Springer; 2006.
1092 I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093

Schmoldt D, Peterson D, Silsbee D. Developing inventory and monitoring
programs based on multiple objectives. Environ Manage 1994;18(5):
707–27.
Schmoldt D, Mendoza GA, Kangas J. Past developments and future directions
for the AHP in natural resources. The Analytic Hierarchy Process in Natural
Resource and Environmental Decision Making; 2001. p. 289 –305.
Seager TP . Understanding industrial ecology and the multiple dimensions of
sustainability. In: O'Brien, Gere Engineers, editors. Strategic environmental
management. New Y ork, NY , USA: John Wiley and Sons; 2004.
Sharifi MA, V an Den Toorn W, Emmanuel M. International Institute for
Geoinformation Science and Earth Observation; 2002.
Shindler B, Aldred Cheek K. Integrating citizens in adaptive management: a
propositional analysis. Conserv Ecol 1999;3(1):9. Available at http://www.
consecol.org/vol3/iss1/art9. Accessed 14 July 2004.
Sit V , Taylor B, editors. Statistical Methods for Adaptive Management Studies.
Land Management Handbook. British Columbia Ministry of Forests
Research Program; 1998.
Soma K. How to involve stakeholders in fisheries management — a country
case study in Trinidad and Tobago. Mar Policy 2003;27:47 –58.
Southeastern Adaptive Management Group (SEAMG); 2004. http://cars.er.usgs.
gov/SEAMG/seamg.html. Accessed 28 September 2004.
Stansbury J, Member PE, Bogardi I, Stakhiv EZ. Risk-cost optimization under
uncertainty for dredged material disposal. J Water Resour Plann Manage
1999;125(6):342–51.
Steyer GD, Llewellyn DW. Coastal wetlands planning, protection, and
restoration act: a programmatic application of adaptive management. Ecol
Eng 2000;15:385–95.
Store R, Kangas J. Integrating spatial multi-criteria evaluation and expert
knowledge for GIS-based habitat suitability modeling. Landsc Urban Plan
2001;55:79–93.
Sutinen JG, editor. A Framework for Monitoring and Assessing Socioeconomics
and Governance of Large Marine Ecosystems, NOAA Technical Memoran-
dum NMFS-NE-158; 2000.
Szaro RC, Berc J, Cameron S, Cordle S, Crosby M, Martin L, et al. The
ecosystem approach: science and information management issues, gaps and
needs. Landsc Urban Plan 1998;40(1 –3):89–101.
Tal A, Linkov I. The role of comparative risk assessment in addressing
environmental security in the Middle East. Risk Anal 2004;24:1243.
Taylor B, Kremsater L, Ellis, R. Adaptive Management of Forests in British
Columbia, British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Forest Practices Branch;
1997. Available at http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfp/amhome/am_publications.
htm. Accessed 20 July 2004.
Thom RH. System-development matrix for adaptive management of coastal
ecosystem restoration projects. Ecol Eng 1997;8:219 –32.
Thom RH. Adaptive management of coastal ecosystem restoration projects.
Ecol Eng 2000;15:365 –72.
Tran L, Knight CG, O ’Neill R, Smith E, Ritters K, Wickham J. Environmental
assessment fuzzy decision analysis for integrated environmental vulnera-
bility assessment of the mid-Atlantic region. Environ Manage 2002;29
(6):845–59.
Treves A, Karanth KU. Human-carnivore conflict and perspectives on carnivore
management worldwide. Conserv Biol 2003;17(6):1491 –9.
USACE (US Army Corps of Engineers). Dredged material management plan for
the Port of New Y ork and New Jersey. Draft implementation report; 1999.
Available at http://www.nan.usace.army.mi l/business/prjlinks/dmmp/
9909imprpt/draftimprpt.pdf.
USACE (US Army Corps of Engineers). USACE environmental operating
principles and implementation guidance; 2003a. Available at http://www.hq.
usace.army.mil/CEPA/7%20Environ%20Prin%20web%20site/Page1.html.
USACE (US Army Corps of Engineers). Planning civil works projects under the
environmental operating principles. Circular 1105-2-404; 2003b. Available
at http://www.usace.army.mil/inet/usace-docs/eng-circulars/ec1105-2-404/
entire.pdf.
USBR. Draft Battle Creek Salmon and Steelhead Restoration Project Adaptive
Management Plan; 2001. http://www.usbr.gov/mp/regional/battlecreek/
docs/AMP_PublicReview-clean.pdf. Accessed 28 September 2004.
USDA. Monitoring; 2003. http://policy.nrcs.usda.gov/scripts/lpsiis.dll/H/
H_190_610_B_35.htm. Accessed 20 September 2004.
US DOE (US Department of Energy). Guidelines for risk-based prioritization of
DOE activities. US Department of Energy; 1998. DOE-DP-STD-3023-98.
US DOE (US Department of Energy). Subject: use of risk-based end states.
Initiated by Office of Environmental Management; 2003. Policy DOE P 455.1.
USGS. Developing an Adaptive Management Approach Using Offsets for
Reducing Mercury Loadings to the Sacramento River Watershed; 2004.
http://geography.wr.usgs.gov/science/mercury-tmdl.html. Accessed 20 Sep-
tember 2004.
van Damme L, Russell JS, Doyon F, Duinker PN, Gooding T, Hirsch K, et al.
The development and application of a decision support system for
sustainable forest management on the Boreal Plain. J Environ Eng Sci
2003;2:S23–4.
V an Moeffaert D, 2002. Multi-Criteria Decision Aid in Sustainable Urban Water
Management [masters thesis]. Stockholm, Sweden: Royal Institute of
Technology.
van Staden V , Erasmus BFN, Roux J, Wingfield MJ, van Jaarsveld AS.
Modelling the spatial distribution of two important South African plantation
forestry pathogens. For Ecol Manage 2004;187:61 –73.
V aillancourt K, Waaub JP . Environmental site evaluation of waste management
facilities embedded into EUGENE model: a multicriteria approach. Eur J
Oper Res 2002;139:436 –48.
V oss Michael. The central and southern Florida project comprehensive review
study: restoring the everglades. Ecol Law Q 2000;27:751 –70.
Wakeman JB. Decision analysis based upon implementability of the action
alternatives at Milltown Dam; 2003. 4 Apr, Email to Igor Linkov.
Wakeman TH, Themelis NJ. A basin-wide approach to dredged material
management in New Y ork/New Jersey Harbor. J Hazard Mater 2001;85:1–13.
Walters C. Challenges in adaptive management of riparian and coastal
ecosystems. Conserv Ecol 1997;1(2):1. Available at http://www.consecol.
org/vol1/iss2/art1. Accessed 14 July 2004.
Walters CJ, Hilborn R. Ecological optimization and adaptive management. Ann
Rev Ecol Syst 1978;9:157 –88.
Weinstein MP , Balletto JH, Teal JM, Ludwig DF. Success criteria and adaptive
management for a large-scale wetland restoration project. Wetlands Ecol
Manag 1997;4:111–27.
Weishar LL, Teal JM. The role of adaptive management in the restoration of
degraded diked salt hay farm wetlands. Proceedings of the ASCE Wetlands
Engineering & River Restoration Conference, Denver, CO; 1998.
Whitaker K, Focht W. Expert modeling of environmental impacts. Okla Polit
2001;10:179–86.
Wilhere GF. Adaptive management in habitat conservation plans. Conserv Biol
2002;16:20–9.
Wladis D, Rosén L, Kros H. Risk-based decision analysis of atmospheric
emission alternatives to reduce ground water degradation on the European
scale. Ground Water 1999;37(6):818 –26.
WWF. Put Environment at the Heart of European Fisheries Policy: WWF
Manifesto for the Review of the EU Common Fisheries Policy; 2001a. http://
www.panda.org/downloads/marine/manifesto_1.pdf. Accessed 17 Septem-
ber 2004.
WWF. Adaptive Management: A Tool for Conservation Practitioners; 2001b.
http://effectivempa.noaa.gov/docs/adaptive.pdf . Accessed 20 September
2004.
Y oe C. Trade-off analysis planning and procedures guidebook. Prepared for
Institute for Water Resources, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; 2002.
1093I. Linkov et al. / Environment International 32 (2006) 1072 –1093