Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
Available online 5 January 2023
0094-5765/© 2023 IAA. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Preliminary analyses on technical and economic viability of moon-mined 
propellant for on-orbit refueling 
Andrea Sommariva a, Paolo Gaudenzi b, Mattia Pianorsi a,*, Michele Pasquali b, Edoardo Vittori c, 
Marco Eugeni b, Matilde Italiano b, Chiara Telli b, Miriam Di Nicola b, Leonella Gori a, 
Barbara Chizzolini d 
a SDA Bocconi School of Management, Via Sarfatti 10, Milano, Italy 
b Universit`a di Roma La Sapienza, Piazza Aldo Moro 5, Roma, Italy 
c Politecnico di Milano, Piazza Leonardo da Vinci 32, Milano, Italy 
d Bocconi University, Via Sarfatti 25, Milano, Italy   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Lunar propellant 
In-space refueling 
Economic convenience 
ABSTRACT  
The present study analyses the technical feasibility and economic sustainability of Moon-mined propellant 
transportation, storage, and distribution to final users. Two technical architectural options are considered for 
propellant transportation: taking fuel from the Moon or from Earth. Both architectures assume the same storage 
and distribution system, i.e., the use of an orbiting depot. The depot will be reachable by various types of 
spacecrafts for refueling. Both architectures are evaluated in terms of technical feasibility, performance and 
economic convenience. As the estimates of the investment, operational costs, and revenues are highly uncertain, 
a risk evaluation, i.e. the Monte Carlo analysis, is used to evaluate the exposure of the ventures to factors that 
could affect the volatility of results and lead them to fail. These analyses identify transporting propellant from the 
Moon as the most promising solution.   
1. Introduction 
Several science missions (e.g. the SOFIA Mission of NASA 2020, 
among others [1]) provided the evidence of high concentration of water 
on Moon poles. This abundance of resources paves the way for the 
expansion of space activities and the development of new business 
models. Previous works have researched and confirmed the technical 
feasibility of building a mining plant on the Moon surface to provide 
water extraction and derive propellant from it [2]. The prospect of 
propellant availability in space would affect many sectors of space 
economy while enhancing deep space exploration. 
On-orbit refueling is performed on a space-based facility (client) by a 
specifically designed space vehicle (supplier). There are several benefits 
associated to it, which range from the extension of a mission’s lifetime 
and the improvement of its flexibility – with regards to mission costs 
reduction and payload mass increase – to the opportunity of enabling 
new missions by reducing the difficulty of travelling beyond Low Earth 
Orbit (LEO). This can lead to new business models for space activities 
and enormous potential market implications such as providing demand 
for materials mined from the Moon and, in the long-term, from asteroids. 
In particular, the availability of propellant produced on the Moon and 
supplied to clients by a distribution architecture is key for the devel-
opment of cis-lunar space activity and beyond. By leveraging lunar ice, 
rockets could potentially refuel once in space, thus being allowed to 
reach distant locations. Since the amount of energy required for ascent 
and descent maneuvers on the Moon surface is considerably less than 
that needed to escape Earth’s gravity, the propellant distribution ac-
tivities become less expensive in terms of propellant consumption. 
Despite the realization of such architecture for cryogenic propellant 
transport, storage and distribution in cis-lunar space demands to face 
nontrivial technical challenges, the potential scientific benefits and 
positive market implications outweigh the disadvantages. 
The objective of the present study, result of a collaboration between 
the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department (DIMA) of 
Sapienza University of Rome and SDA Bocconi School of Management, is 
to understand the economics behind an infrastructure that can enable 
the refueling of spacecrafts with lunar propellant. Building on the results 
of a previous research addressing the economic viability of water 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: mattia.pianorsi@sdabocconi.it (M. Pianorsi).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Acta Astronautica 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/actaastro 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actaastro.2023.01.004 
Received 17 July 2022; Received in revised form 1 December 2022; Accepted 4 January 2023   

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
426
extraction on the Moon surface to produce in-situ liquid hydrogen (LH2) 
and oxygen (LOX), this study evaluates both the technical feasibility and 
the economical convenience of a system for propellant transportation, 
storage, and distribution, which can provide on-orbit refueling to po-
tential users. 
2. Adopted approach 
At first, the technical viability analysis is conducted to determine the 
optimal configuration of the propellant distribution facility by exam-
ining the engineering feasibility of the infrastructure and evaluating the 
engineering costs related to it. The analysis, based upon the assumption 
that a mining plant on the moon surface is technically feasible and able 
to provide cryogenic propellant from the moon’s ice, is performed 
considering state of the art of on-orbit refueling and available engi-
neering solutions in terms of technologies for cryogenic propellant 
storage and transfer. As a result, a depot-centric propellant distribution 
architecture is determined together with its optimal placement at 
Lagrangian point L1. The depot is envisioned to be served by a vehicle 
(here and henceforth referred to as “Moon shuttle”) which performs 
ascent and descent maneuvers from/to the Moon surface and L1 to refuel 
the depot’s tanks with Moon-mined propellant. This approach is 
compared with the option of servicing the depot by a heavy launch 
vehicle, which takes propellant from the Earth. Once full, the depot is 
intended to be available for propellant transfer to clients performing 
refueling docking maneuvers. 
The definition of the propellant distribution architecture features 
various steps: (i) the selection of the type of distribution architecture to 
be considered, (ii) the determination the of optimal placement of the 
distribution facility, (iii) a preliminary design of the distribution facility, 
(iv) the analysis of refueling maneuvers associated to the distribution 
architecture and finally (v) an estimation of the overall costs associated 
to the distribution pattern, considering not only the initial necessary 
investment, but also the operational costs, maintenance, and expansion 
costs. 
With the technical infrastructure and an estimation of the overall 
investment costs, it is then possible to analyze the economic conve-
nience. We assume that we are in a market composed by a mining 
company, a monopolistic transporter/distributor company, and end- 
users. The mining company only sells fuel on the Moon at a fixed 
price of 500 $/kg as in Refs. [1,2]. The monopolistic trans-
porter/distributor company buys propellant from the Moon and trans-
ports it to the deposit in L1. 
This approach is compared with a transporter which buys propellant 
from Earth and transports it to the deposit. We will see that transporting 
fuel from the Moon needs a high initial investment to research and 
develop the Moon Shuttle, on the other hand transporting fuel from 
Earth will have higher operational costs caused by Earth’s gravity. 
Through the Net Present Value (NPV) analyses, it is possible to weigh 
costs and benefits of these approaches. 
The viability of the two projects is strongly affected by the potential 
selling price of the propellant, a value that is determined from the ratio 
of the net present value of the expected operating cash flows and the cost 
of the initial capital of the suppliers. 
Fig. 1. Example of LOX/LH2 depots in assembled configuration [5].  
Fig. 2. Example of a fluid’s management system (spin around longitudinal 
axis) [5]. 
Fig. 3. Lunar propellant depot in L1 [9].  
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
427
3. Technical viability 
3.1. Selection of the distribution architecture 
Improving a space-based capability through a combination of on- 
orbit activities is the most viable path forward for continuing to 
expand space activities beyond their present limitations and enable new 
missions. The process of performing servicing operation in space such as 
inspection, orbit modification and maintenance, upgrade and repair, 
assembly, debris mitigation and refueling is known as On-Orbit 
Servicing (OOS). On-orbit refueling is a servicing operation attainable 
using either Orbiting Depots (OD) [3] or a distributed launch architec-
ture resorting to Heavy Lift (HL) launches [4]. 
The HL configuration is limited by the performances of current 
launchers in terms of payload capability and ΔV requirements [4]. The 
technique is based on an in-space assembly of upper stages with the 
main purpose of performing an ad-hoc propellant transfer to a vehicle. 
This approach is subject to higher failure probability because of the 
multi-launch architecture involving multiple systems. Additionally, the 
system is specific for each space mission: the payload, the launch win-
dows and the on-orbit docking are in fact designed to support a partic-
ular end-user scenario [4]. ODs represent a far less mission-dependent 
option when considering possible propellant distribution architectures. 
In this case the depot servicing platforms are located where the pro-
pellant is stored and transferred to vehicles as needed so that the mission 
and depot’s design are meant to serve various types of users. This con-
figures a flexible and adaptable system that can be easily launched in an 
assembled configuration [5] (see Fig. 1). Both HL and OD options 
require storing the propellant, which usually consists of liquid oxygen 
and hydrogen, in cryogenic conditions. The HL approach requires less 
storage time than the OD architecture as the latter is meant to represent 
a flexible solution for any kind of space mission. On the contrary, in the 
HL configuration the upper stage should be equipped by all the sub-
systems required to store hydrogen and oxygen in liquid phase for each 
launch, increasing the mass amount [6]. 
Based on these considerations, the depot-centric configuration is 
selected as the most suitable option to enable on-orbit refueling in cis- 
lunar space. The depot should be designed as a space vehicle equipped 
with propellant storage tanks placed in a suitable point in space, for 
example LEO orbit or Lagrangian point L1. 
3.2. Optimal placement of the orbiting depot 
The placement of the distribution facility must consider the current 
and forecast in-space market demand [7]. To this purpose, both LEO, 
low lunar orbit (LLO) and the Lagrangian point L1 are strategic selling 
points for a beyond-Earth In-Situ Resource Utilization (ISRU) facility to 
support space missions and exploration [2]. A trade-off analysis between 
different possible OD placements is performed considering four main 
factors, such as technical requirements related to cryogenic propellant 
storage and transfer, launch windows to reach both the depot’s place-
ment and the client’s destination, and potential market demand. 
On the technical requirements side, cryogenic propellants require 
complex systems for fluid management and thermal control to minimize 
the propellant boil-off driven by heat transfer that could hinder cryo-
genic conditions (see Fig. 2). Existing technologies and materials are 
considered capable of guaranteeing the necessary thermal management 
performances [5]: in this sense, among the possible OD placement op-
tions, LEO and LLO orbits are particularly unfavorable due to the wide 
temperature range experienced caused by, among the others, solar ra-
diation and terrestrial albedo [8]. The Lagrangian point L1 appears 
instead to be a more suitable solution [8] (see Fig. 3). 
One of the most important benefits of L1 placement is related to 
launch windows, which are continuously open both to/from Earth and 
to/from the lunar surface [10]. This would facilitate refueling maneu-
vers from the lunar plant by making them always possible and it would 
Table 1 
The characteristics of the designed OD.  
LOX mass [t] LH2 mass [t] Depot dry mass 
[t] 
Material Dimensions [m] 
21.43 3.57 3.47 SS 301 Height h = 5.79 
Diameter d = 4 
Depot’s subsystems mass budget [kg] 
Propulsion 927.73 
AOCS 173.95 
EPS 1,043.70 
TCS 139.16 
DMS 69.58 
TTC 34.79 
Structure 521.85 
Harness 104.37 
Dry Mass (with margin) 3479  
Fig. 4. CSDC’s Moon shuttle rendering [20].  
Table 2 
CSDC’s Moon shuttle specs [20].  
Moon Shuttle – CSDC 
Payload 
capability [t] 
Vehicle dry 
mass [t] 
Tanks 
capability [t] 
Isp 
[s] 
Dimensions 
[m] 
25 14.2 69 450 Height h = 8.1 
Diameter d =
7.5  
Table 3 
OD and CSDC’s Moon shuttle DDT&E costs [22].  
Vehicles DDT&E and Manufacturing Costs [M$] 
Depot DDT&E Costs 400 
Depot Manufacturing Costs 25 
Moon Shuttle DDT&E Costs 1,200 
Moon Shuttle Manufacturing Costs 700  
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
428
support lunar missions being a direct link between the Earth and the 
Moon. Reaching the Moon surface is possible from LEO too, even though 
the launch window is every 9 days. However, considering potential 
users’ destinations, interplanetary departure from LEO is not guaranteed 
during an interplanetary transfer window due to the orbit precession of 
the depot over time, while it is guaranteed form L1 [11]. Despite the 
convenience of the launch windows, a drawback of L1 placement is the 
expensive braking maneuver which has to be performed to dock when 
arriving from LEO [12]. When considering refueling maneuvers from the 
Moon surface, on the other hand, L1 becomes particularly advantageous 
[6]: from here, it would also be possible to refuel a LEO depot with lunar 
propellant through a low-cost maneuver which resorts to aerobraking 
systems [2]. 
The potential market for a LEO-based OD solution consists in various 
types of missions, ranging from servicing commercial Earth satellites to 
supporting GEO and lunar missions. An orbiting depot placed in L1, on 
the other side, would primarily service customers looking to exploit cis- 
lunar (and beyond) development [2]. Since the placement of an OD is 
highly dependent on the missions to be supported and eventual clients’ 
requirements, a comprehensive scenario could also consider both solu-
tions, i.e. LEO and L1 depots, working together. In a scenario foreseeing 
a single OD, however, a L1-placed OD represents the best option for the 
reasons discussed above and it is therefore selected for the analysis in the 
following part of the study. 
3.3. Preliminary design 
The selected distribution facility includes a depot in L1 served by a 
Moon shuttle. In order to define the depot’s features, it is necessary to 
determine the main requirements of the design. They can be divided into 
three categories: (i) technical requirements for cryogenic propellant 
storage, (ii) requirements imposed by available launchers to position the 
assembled depot in L1, (iii) requirements imposed by the chosen vehicle 
to perform the depot refueling form the Moon surface. The design is 
conceived to reach a compromise between these requirements and to 
define the optimal configuration. 
Technical requirements for cryogenic propellant storage mainly refer 
to thermal insulation, zero boil-off and fluid management and transfer. 
The features of existing tanks for cryogenic propellant are taken into 
account to define the properties of the depot and its subsystem. In 
particular, the selected thickness and materials of LOX/LH2 tanks are in 
accordance with the values of Centaur’s tanks (a balloon-like tanks 
developed by ULA) [9,13–17]. In this study, an optimal solution be-
tween the structure’s thickness and the internal pressure at launch is 
adopted. This type of concept, in fact, allows a lighter structure via 
thickness reduction given that the necessary pressurization of the pro-
pellant is maintained at launch and while in service so to grant the 
required structural rigidity and avoid structural instabilities [13]. For 
these reasons, the propellant depot is envisioned to be equipped with a 
pressurization system and, thanks to the reduced structural mass gran-
ted by the adopted monocoque configuration, also partially filled with 
propellant at launch. 
The dimensions of the depot are selected in compliance with the 
performances of available launchers and refueling vehicles. The analysis 
is carried out considering both pre-existing technologies and designed 
vehicles, currently in testing phase. There are different launchers that 
can reach L1 for OD placement, whereas the selection of the Moon 
shuttle is more limited. The chosen refueling vehicle is designed by 
Cislunar Space Development Company (CSDC) and it can transfer to the 
depot up to 25 t of propellant from the lunar surface [9]. As it is it 
propelled by LOX/LH2, this vehicle can be refueled directly by the lunar 
plant. To be compatible with the Moon shuttle’s payload capability, the 
depot’s capacity was fixed at 25 t of propellant mass so that it can be 
completely refilled with a single trip. The chosen O/F ratio and the 
actual dimension of the depot are selected considering the launcher’s 
requirements in terms of fairing allowance and payload capability for 
the L1 destination. The payload mass budget allowed by the launcher is 
also taken into account to verify whether a full depot can be launched 
from Earth. 
For a preliminary investigation, SpaceX’s Falcon Heavy has been 
considered [14]. Its maximum launch capability depends on the final 
destination: for the L1 option, the maximum launch capability is only 
17.5 t [18]. This means that the depot cannot be launched completely 
full. As mentioned above, the chosen structure for the OD is a 
balloon-like tank: following the design choice adopted for the Centaur 
upper stage [19], inox austenitic steel 301 is considered as main 
constitutive material. A capacity of 25 t LOX/LH2 with a mixture ratio of 
6 [5] is selected, resulting in dimensions (h = 5.79 m, d = 4 m) chosen to 
be compliant with Falcon Heavy’s fairings. The features of the design are 
shown in Table 1. 
3.4. Refueling scenarios 
To evaluate the pros and cons of Moon-mined propellant availability 
and distribution, a comparison is made between two possible refueling 
scenarios for the L1 depot, namely, refueling performed from Earth and 
from the Moon-based ISRU facility. To clarify the exposition, we refer to 
the latter as Case 1 and to the former as Case 2. 
3.4.1. Vehicles 
To refuel the depot with lunar propellant it is necessary to select a 
suitable vehicle which performs such maneuver. As mentioned above, 
the chosen vehicle is designed by CSDC and shown in Fig. 4 [20]. To 
date, no info about the lander reusability (i.e., how many times it can be 
refueled before maintenance is due) is made available by CSDC. 
The data used for the analysis is shown in Table 2. Since the vehicle 
must be transferred to the Moon surface, the cost of its launch must also 
be considered. Because of its dimensions, the most suitable launcher for 
its transport is found to be NASA’s SLS [21]. 
Being propelled by LOX/LH2, the Moon Shuttle is directly served by 
the lunar mining plant. The in-situ facility would provide the necessary 
Table 4 
CSDC’s Moon shuttle transportation cost via NASA’s SLS [22].  
Moon Shuttle transportation on Moon – NASA’s SLS launcher 
Lift off mass [t] 14.2 
Launch cost [$/kg] 47,183 
Total launch cost [M$] 670  
Table 5 
Refueling costs from the Moon surface.  
Case 1: Refueling costs from the Moon surface 
Refueling vehicle [20] CSDC Moon shuttle 
Refueling vehicle payload [t] [20] 25 
Estimated propellant for maneuver [t] 50.02 
Propellant cost on Moon surface [$/kg] [2] 500 
Estimated refueling cost (propellant + maneuver) [M$] 37.51 
Operation cost [M$/year] [22] 35  
Table 6 
Refueling costs from the Earth surface.  
Case 2: Refueling costs from the Earth 
Refueling vehicle [25] Falcon Heavy Expendable +
Propellant tank 
Refueling vehicle payload [t] 17.5 
Launch costs [$/kg] 6,511.4 
Estimated refueling cost (propellant +
launch) [M$] 
227.9 
Operation cost [M$/year] [26] 42.38  
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
429
propellant both for the transport and for the depot’s refueling, with a 
total cost obtained by summing the two. Once placed in L1 point, the 
lander is intended to dock into the depot and refuel to perform the 
descent manoeuvre to the moon surface, making use of the fuel already 
present a launch in the OD. In this preliminary study, the propellant 
required by the lander to perform propulsive manoeuvres for its first 
docking into the depot is neglected. The costs due to the Design, 
Development, Testing and Evaluation (DDT&T) of both the fuel depot 
and the Moon shuttle are taken from literature [22] and are reported in 
Table 3. 
The refueling vehicle needs to be transported on the Moon surface in 
order to perform refueling maneuvers. The costs of which are reported in 
Table 4. Because of its assumed dimensions [22], the only currently 
available launcher is NASA’s SLS that is currently under testing [21]. 
3.4.2. Refueling maneuvers 
The Moon-based refueling manoeuvres consists of three phases: (i) 
the Moon shuttle leaves the Moon surface with the maximum payload 
capability and performs an ascent maneuver; (ii) it then docks with the 
depot in L1 to allow the fuel transfer and (iii) it finally comes back 
landing with its only dry mass. For each phase, knowing the ΔV re-
quirements, the necessary propellant’s mass for manoeuvre is estimated. 
The main assumption is that there are no propellant losses during the 
transfer; thus, the vehicle takes off with the sufficient propellant to 
perform such an operation. For any phase the Tsiolkovsky equation has 
been implemented to calculate the necessary propellant [23]. The cost 
breakdown is presented in Table 5. 
The result of this study shows that the Moon shuttle can leave lunar 
surface, refuel L1 depot with 25 t of propellant and return to the Moon 
without needing to refuel, consuming about 50 t of LOX/LH2 propellant. 
Refueling from Earth is then analyzed by considering an architecture 
compatible with the designed OD to be refilled. In this case, in the lift-off 
mass evaluation, the tank to be launched containing the propellant 
needed to refill the OD consists only of the structure, the propulsion and 
the thermal management subsystems shown in Table 1. As already 
mentioned, two Falcon Heavy launches would be necessary to 
completely refuel the OD in this scenario. The total cost is estimated by 
summing the propellant’s cost on Earth [24], that is negligible, and the 
launch costs. By considering that the total launch cost for a FH 
Expendable is of 150 M$, the cost estimation has been made as follows: 
the maximum capability for FH Expendable is 17.5 t [25], but the 
requirement is to bring 26.69 t as 25 t of propellant are needed to refill 
the OD and the rest is necessary to transfer the refilling tank with its 
subsystems, as derived by Table 1. It means that ~1.5 launches are 
ideally required to completely refuel the OD; the total cost is obtained by 
multiplying the real launch cost by the ideal number of launches, 
totaling the price of 227.9 M$, as shown in Table 6. 
A schematic representation of the various phases which constitute 
the Case 1 and Case 2 refueling scenarios is shown in Fig. 5. 
3.5. Overall costs of the case studies 
Tables 7 and 8 sum up the computation and the comparisons that 
have been performed in order to carry out the cost estimation for Moon- 
and Earth-based OD refueling. Refueling from Earth of course does not 
require a Moon-based refueling vehicle: all the associated costs, such as 
design, test evaluation, manufacturing and transportation of such 
vehicle therefore do not appear in the table. On the contrary, it is 
apparent that performing a refueling maneuver from Earth surface 
basically translates into operating with a quasi-heavy lift approach, 
implying multiple required launches to refill the OD as the cheapest 
available launcher, i.e., Falcon Heavy Expendable, does not match the 
maximum capability of the depot. Therefore, the launch, the operations, 
the propellant’s transfer and all the other maneuvers must be performed 
more than one time, leading to a more difficult and less reliable refueling 
strategy. 
Fig. 5. Schematic representation of two refueling scenarios considered in the study. In Case 1 (left) the first 3 phases only take place once to deploy the Orbiting 
Depot (OD) and the Moon Shuttle (MS) at L1 point and perform a successive docking to allow the latter to embark the necessary fuel to carry out the descent on the 
Moon surface. Phases 4 to 7 are repeated to periodically refuel the OD. In Case 2 (right) only the first phase of OD deployment at L1 takes place once as Propellant 
Tanks (PT) must be periodically launched form Earth to refuel the OD. 
Table 7 
Costs associated to L1-based OD refueling from the Moon (* per year).  
Case 1: Refueling from Moon 
Fixed costs  Parameter [M$] 
DDT&E Depot 400 
Moon Shuttle 1,200 
Manufacturing Depot 25 
Moon Shuttle 700 
Transportation Depot in L1 150 
Moon Shuttle on Lunar surface 670 
Recurring costs Refueling 37.51 
Operations 35*  
Table 8 
Costs associated to L1-based OD refueling from the Earth surface (* per year).  
Case 2: Refueling from Earth 
Fixed costs  Parameter [M$] 
DDT&E Depot 400 
Manufacturing Depot 25 
Transportation Depot in L1 150 
Recurring costs Refueling 227.9 
Operations 42.38*  
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
430
4. Business model 
4.1. Economic assumptions 
The assessment of the economic sustainability of the two refueling 
models (Case 1 and Case 2) requires a comparison between the two al-
ternatives. Our aim is to identify the existence of a competitive space 
that allows an economic choice between the two cases and requires 
estimations of the expected future cash flows. The achievement of this 
goal is possible by forecasting future cash flows of the firms involved in 
the two cases. In our study we assume the presence of a single trans-
porter/distributor; we justify this assumption by that considering the 
required investment is too large for multiple companies to enter the 
market together. This assumption simplifies, at this stage of our study, 
the analysis of the competition in the market. Once estimated the ex-
pected future cash flows, the rationale of the NPV criterion is the basis to 
verify the presence of a competitive space based on the identification of 
two minimum prices for the final users in every context, i.e., in Case 1 
and Case 2, respectively. These estimations, requiring a discounting 
process, are linked to consistent assumptions in terms of riskiness and 
related opportunity cost of capital. 
The Net Present Value formula is here presented: 
NPV0= 
∑N
t=0
CAPEXt
(1+ r)t +
∑T
t=N+1
CFt
(1+ r)t  
where CFt are the net cash inflow-outflow, r is the discount rate, and T is 
the number of years of the project for which the cash flows are estimated 
and discounted. CAPEXt are the cash outflows for the construction phase 
of the analyzed projects. The fundamental principle of value creation is 
that the project creates value by investing the capital raised from in-
vestors to generate cash flows at rates of return exceeding the cost of 
capital (the rate that investors require for bearing the risk associated 
with the uncertainties of the projected cash flows). Both in Case 1 and 
Case 2, N = 5 and T = 10: the other components of the NPV formula will 
be described in the following sections. 
4.1.1. General assumptions 
Our model requires some hypotheses that are common to the two 
scenarios. In terms of rationale, the valuation requires estimating de-
mand, recurring costs, set-up costs, and cost of capital for the two cases. 
All the assumptions are specific for each alternative but the quantity of 
the supplied propellant, that is constant and equal to 280 Mt per year 
[2]. This implies that at least eleven journeys per year are necessary to 
recharge the depot (capability 25 Mt). 
The estimations about the costs per each case have been already 
described above in Tables 7–8 Despite the assumptions in terms of De-
mand Quantity are available, the price that allows the revenues esti-
mation is the unknown variable in our Cash flow estimation and the real 
aim of this study. The final output of our research that generates the cash 
flow estimation prospectus is presented in Table 9, where the first row 
(“Final Price Fuel”) for the two Cases is the final output allowing us to 
understand the competitive distance between the two choices. 
Considering that one of our goals is to understand if there is room for 
a commercial market to emerge, our interest is in the minimum selling 
price that it is necessary to set for the “Case 1” and the “Case 2”. At this 
price, the Net Present Value is equal to zero, implying that a lower price 
destroys the convenience for the operator. 
The market belongs to the operator who can sell the propellant at the 
lower price and, additionally, the market exists between the two 
boundaries. If our study confirms a difference between the two mini-
mum prices, the potential market could incentivize the intervention of 
public actors, willing to provide initial grants to stimulate the partici-
pation of private firms. This intervention lowers the amount of invest-
ment required to private companies and reduces their risk exposure. 
Uncertainty is one of the most relevant aspects in the valuation of 
every investment project, but it is crucial in innovative initiatives. The 
most peculiar aspect of the two alternatives here analyzed is, likely, the 
total absence of a similar work fruit of the human ingenuity. This is 
particularly true for Case 1. In accordance with this consideration, we 
estimate the two risk and expected return profiles, the first one suited to 
the “from earth refueling” alternative and the latter one elaborated for 
the “from moon refueling” project. In this part of the paper, we do not 
model the risk (the following part presents the Scenario and Montecarlo 
analysis), but we consider its presence; this requires a cost of capital 
estimation different from the risk-free rate. 
4.1.2. Specific assumption: case 2 – cost of capital 
Even though there is a non-negligible difference between the aero-
space projects already carried out in human history and the project 
object of this study, it is possible to identify a portfolio of possible 
comparable companies among the constituents of the S&P Kensho Space 
Index, a Stock Index dedicated to companies focused on the space in-
dustry. Starting with their parameter of risk remunerated by the finan-
cial market, identified, according to the literature and the operating 
practice, with the statistical Beta, we initially assume a similar financing 
mix in terms of Debt and Equity contribution to our project. It is 
remarkable that according with our expectations, the risk parameter for 
our portfolio of peers is permanently high, around 1.70, representing 
high sensitivity to the volatility of the overall market. We precise that, at 
the birth of these innovative projects, we are using the Beta concept and 
the assumptions in terms of financial structure with a long-time 
perspective, as a possible measure of equilibrium solution, suitable for 
our purposes. 
Financial procedures for the treatment of risk allow us to recalculate 
a beta for our project, based on a similar financial structure [27]. We use 
the Bloomberg database as a basis for our calculations and are able to 
estimate a final cost of capital aligned with the average Weighted 
Average Cost of Capital (WACC), the discount rate for the expected cash 
flows characterizing the portfolio of comparable companies (namely, 
the WACC for our discounting process is equal to 11.50%). This discount 
rate, joined with the assumption of a demand equal to 280 Mt allows us 
to find out the minimum price (10.55 M$/Mt) that keeps the 
Table 9 
Data input assumptions for the project: from Moon to L1 and the project From 
Earth to L1.    
Case 1: From 
Moon to L1 
Case 2: From 
Earth to L1 
Revenues 
(Operating phase) 
Final fuel price [M$/Mt] 5.07 10.55 
Yearly demand of fuel 
[Mt] 
280 280 
Total yearly revenues 
[M$] 
1,419 2,954 
Operating Costs 
(Operating phase) 
Refueling from moon 
per journey [M$] 
37.51 227.90 
Yearly missions from 
moon to depot [M$] 
420.11 2,552.48 
Yearly operation costs 
[M$] 
35 42.38 
Total yearly operating 
costs [M$] 
455.11 2,594.86 
Investment Costs DDT&E total costs [M$] 1,600 400 
Manufacturing costs [M 
$] 
725 25 
Launch costs [M$] 820 150 
Total capital 
expenditure (CAPEX) 
[M$] 
3,145 575 
Depreciation & 
Amortization 
Depreciation rate 10.00% 10.00% 
Yearly depreciation [M 
$] 
314.5 57.5 
Tax Rate Corporate tax rate 28.00% 28.00% 
Weighted Average 
Cost of Capital 
WACC discount rate 13% 11.50% 
NPV 0 0  
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
431
convenience of the project.1 
We highlight that we unconventionally explained the “Case 2 Cost of 
capital estimation” before presenting “Case 1 Cost of Capital” only for 
expository clarity due to the better comparability with existing 
activities. 
4.1.3. Specific assumption – case 1 – cost of capital 
When considering the initiative of recharging the Depot in L1 with 
the propellant mined on the lunar surface, we see not only a notable 
increase in the necessary funds (the moon shuttle is the most relevant 
incremental outflow) but also an exacerbation of the perceived risk. No 
kind of human presence is currently active on the lunar territory, making 
it extremely challenging to identify a group of comparable companies 
for the cost of capital. The parameter used to explain the increase in risk 
in the new context is linked to the size of the necessary investment. The 
size has already demonstrated to be a good predictor of the increase in 
risk, read as probability of obtaining lower than expected annualized 
returns on investments, so we decide to link the increase in risk to this 
marginal effect [28]. The new beta is therefore 13% higher than the beta 
for project “from Earth” and the cost of financial sources rises accord-
ingly to this assumption. 
Carrying out the necessary calculations, we estimate a final WACC 
discount rate for this case, equal to 13%. Even here, we identify the 
minimum price that keeps the NPV convenient, i.e., not below zero: in 
this case the price for fuel has to be set up at 5.07 M$/Mt. 
This result is particularly important to influence the choice between 
the two projects: refueling from the Moon, although more expensive 
during the construction phase and riskier, appears more affordable in 
terms of final price and makes the development of a commercial market, 
possibly supported by public intervention, more likely and interesting 
for the stakeholders. Establishing the minimum price that allows a non- 
negative net present value for the two projects we find can the price 
range for Case 1 that makes this alternative attractive: 10.55 M$/Mt – 
5.07 M$/Mt. Perhaps even more interesting, we can state that Case 1 is a 
competitive choice even at a final price of 10.55 M$/Mt. At this last 
possible price, i.e., 10.55 M$/Mt, the Case 1 NPV results in about 3 
$billion. The correspondent Internal Rate of Return (IRR), at that price, 
is 16%, higher than the cost of capital. 
An interesting conclusion is linked to the risk considerations. The 
operative risk is different between the two alternatives (Case 1 and Case 
2). This risk can affect the financial sustainability of the investment, but 
the governmental intervention could mitigate the volatility, in partic-
ular its downside, opening to the possibility of a Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) model designed as in the more traditional infra-
structural Project Financing. 
4.1.4. Business model summary 
The models based on the expected values (according to our esti-
mates) are computed using the estimated capital costs (Section 4.1.2 and 
4.1.3), fixed and recurring costs (Tables 7and8), and on the volume 
(280 Mt) and price (5.07 and 10.55 M$/kg) of propellant sold each year 
for each case. The business model, with the volatility in inputs and 
outputs included in the estimated cost of capital, is discussed above, and 
is summarized in Table 9 for Case 1 and Case 2. But the model lacks the 
explicit mention of the risk of under or overspending over each cost 
item, or of the risk of changing the fuel prices through time. 
5. Scenario and Monte Carlo analysis 
In this section, we do a scenario and Monte Carlo analysis to gain 
further insights on the profitability and risk of the project. Specifically, 
we assume that the costs and the prices are random lognormal variables, 
following standard practices. We highlight that a lognormal distribution 
is particularly suitable to describe economic variables, in particular to 
account possible extra high values of revenues and expenses. 
A random variable, X, has a lognormal distribution, with parameters 
μ and d, if ln(X) is normally distributed with mean μ and standard de-
viation d. The variable X is always positive, right skewed, and its values 
are massed around the Median, the value exp(μ). Considering Table 9, 
the variables to which we assign a distribution are: final fuel price, total 
yearly operating costs, and CAPEX. For both cases, we consider the value 
in Table 9 as the median of the lognormal distribution and a standard 
deviation of 10% of the median. 
For example in the case of CAPEX for Case 1 we assume exp(μ) =
Fig. 6. The lognormal distributions of the CAPEX of the Moon firm.  
Fig. 7. The histograms of the NPV Case 1.  
Fig. 8. The histogram of the NPV Case 2.  
1 We will refer to 10.55 M$/Mt as the minimum price for Case 2. Similarly, 
5.07 M$/Mt as the minimum price for Case 1. 
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
432
3,145 M$ (see in Table 9), so a random value for CAPEXM
i is specified as: 
CAPEXM
i = exp(μ)∗ ui → ln
 
CAPEXM
i
)
= μ+ ei; ei ∼ N
 
0, d2)
We show in Fig. 6 the histogram of the simulated CAPEX lognormal 
distribution of Case 1. We forecast a safe scenario – low risk, so that the 
standard deviation of each random variable is d = 10% of the median. In 
the simulation of CAPEX for case 1 we obtain a standard deviation of 
314. 
As presented in Equation (1), cash flows for the Moon and Earth firms 
have two parts. The first that lasts five years is the construction phase, 
where the initial Capital (Depot, in Case 2; Depot and Moon Shuttle in 
Case 1) is built, and the operating phase lasts the following 10 years. 
In the simulation exercises, we compute the NPV from the expected 
future cash flows 5,000 times for both Case 1 and Case 2. At each iter-
ation, the random values are sampled from the lognormal distributions. 
The 5,000 solved NPVs are represented in Figs. 7 and 8 for the two Cases. 
Remember that in the “Expected” NPV calculations, the prices have 
been fixed to get NPV zero, (the minimum price in Case 1 was fixed at 
5.07 M$/Mt with a WACC discount rate at 13%, while for Case 2 it was 
set at 10.55 M$/Mt with an 11.5% WACC discount rate). 
The Moon and Earth NPV graphs show different structures. The 
“Expected” NPV computed from the values in Table 9, is zero and co-
incides with the median in histograms in Figs. 7 and 8, so the probability 
of negative NPVs is 50%, the same for both cases. For Case 1 the 
simulated values around the “Expected” NVP fall in the 90% confidence 
interval, between   400 M$ to 380 M$. For Case 2 this interval is larger, 
  604 M$ to 629 M$, and the random NPV has a higher standard devi-
ation (370 M$ versus 250 M$), implying that the risk is larger for Case 2 
than for Case 1. It is interesting to note that most of the risk of the NPV of 
Earth firms is attached to the yearly missions, while most of the risk of 
Moon firms NPV comes from the initial CAPEX. 
We can also simulate the NPVs as functions of the discount rate (see 
Fig. 9). These figures consider the minimum prices (for a null NPV at the 
WACC in Table 9) as the discount rate changes, the central line in the 
graphs is the “Expected” NVP, the lower line connects the values of the 
5% quantile of the simulated NVP (VaR 5%), the higher line connects the 
values of the 95% quantile of the simulated NVP (95% quantile). Look at 
the differences of the costs between the Moon and the Earth projects in 
Table 9: the increase of the discount rate lowers the Moon NPV more 
than the Earth NPV, as the higher rate discounts the high Operating costs 
of the Earth transporter, less the CAPEX of the Moon transporter. 
In the last figure, Fig. 10, the Case 1 NPV is simulated assuming that 
the median of the lognormal price is 10.55 M$/Mt, which doubles the 
Case 1 minimum price, but it is still competitive with Earth refueling 
firms. This almost triples the NVP at each discount rate, generates an IRR 
of circa 32% and, for example, the probability of high profit and nega-
tive NPV is zero at a discount rate 20%. 
We highlight the relevance of the result emerging from the 
comparison of Figs. 9 and 10: the NPV generated by Case 1 can afford a 
higher level of risk and is positive until around a 32% discount rate. This 
level is also the maximum cost of capital this project can afford, 
implying a better appeal for private equity investors and allowing the 
definition of a more sophisticated financial structure. This implies that 
the project can tolerate a higher level of debt because the recourse to 
borrowed funds increases the risk and the expected return on a project 
[29], as the trend followed by the Capital Market Line indicates. The 
increase in the expected return is the result of the additional debt, but, 
on the other hand, the marginal unit of debt does not generate negative 
effects on the value immediately, but only when its usage exceeds the 
optimal level that equalizes benefits and costs it generates. Trade-off 
theories analyze this aspect in detail. About the effects of debt intro-
duction on value, see also [30,31]. 
As a result, a higher level of debt tolerance can make the project 
suitable to be financed with project finance loans by banks or with funds 
provided by institutional investors because close to the risk and return 
goals defined by these financial actors. 
6. Conclusions 
Our study compares two possible projects to refuel an on-orbit depot 
of propellant available for in space recharging activities from the Moon 
or Earth in order to verify two separate conclusions. We verify that 
operating an on-orbit depot is feasible and that recharging it is 
economically more affordable from the Moon as its price to final cus-
tomers, which guarantees the profitability of the project, is lower than 
recharging the depot from Earth, thus making this option more suitable 
Fig. 9. NPV as a function of the discount rates.  
Fig. 10. Moon NPV at the Earth minimum’s price.  
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

Acta Astronautica 204 (2023) 425–433
433
to facilitate the emergence of a private demand, together with saving 
costs to public space exploration missions. In addition, the more 
expensive alternative from Earth is also more exposed to volatility 
implying higher levels of the underlying operational risks. 
Besides, the price gap suggests that there is enough room for more 
than an operator that transports and distributes propellant from the 
lunar surface, making it reasonable for governments to disburse initial 
funding to multiple ventures, at least to support technology demon-
stration and validation phases. In addition, the risk and return expec-
tations are not only attractive to private equity investors but they are 
also potentially suitable to balance the financial structure of the venture 
with more risk-adverse financers such as institutional investors. 
In conclusion, our study lays the foundation for approaching the 
development of transportation and distribution infrastructures for lunar- 
based propellant and it suggests that there are the conditions for 
enhancing private capital formation with which governments can share 
the risks of the venture as occurs in common infrastructure financing. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
References 
[1] A. Sommariva, et al., The economics of moon mining, Acta Astronaut. 170 (2020) 
712–718. 
[2] G. Sowers, et al., Commercial lunar propellant architecture: a collaborative study 
of lunar propellant production, Reach. Out. 13 (2019), 100026. 
[3] A.M. Long, M.G. Richards, D.E. Hastings, On-orbit servicing: a new value 
proposition for satellite design and operation, J. Spacecraft Rockets 44 (4) (2007) 
964–976. 
[4] J. Goff, et al., Depot-Centric Human Spaceflight: Strengthening American Industry, 
Creating a Robust Beyond-LEO Exploration Program and Enabling the Commercial 
Development of Space, 2009. www.nasa.gov. 
[5] J.A. Goff, et al., AIAA SPACE 2009 conference & exposition 14 - 17 september 
2009, in: Realistic Near-Term Propellant Depots: Implementation of a Critical 
Spacefaring Capability, Pasadena, California, USA, 2009. 
[6] J. Connolly, Human Lunar Exploration Mission Architectures, LPI Lunar 
Knowledge Requirements Workshop, vols. 1–3, 2004. March 2004 Huston, Texas, 
USA. 
[7] J.P. Davis, J. Mayberry, J.P. Penn, On-orbit Servicing: Inspection, Repair, Refuel, 
Upgrade, and Assembly of Satellites in Space, 2019. https://aerospace.org. 
[8] B.F. Kutter, et al., A Practical, Affordable Cryogenic Propellant Depot Based on 
ULA’s Flight Experience, AIAA SPACE, San Diego, California, USA, 2008, 2008 
Conference & Exposition 9 - 11 September 2008. 
[9] J.S. De Kruif, Atlas and Centaur flight experience using a delta-P system for 
propellant mass gauging and utilization, joint army-navy-NASA-air force 
(JANNAF) interagency propulsion committee, May 14 (2007) 2007. 
[10] M. Loucks, J. Goff, J. Carrico, Practical Methodologies for Low Delta-V Penalty, 
On-Time Departures to Arbitrary Interplanetary Destinations from A Medium- 
Inclination Low-Earth Orbit Depot, AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics Specialist 
Conference, 20 – 24 August 2017 Stevenson, 2017. Washington, USA. 
[11] M. Loucks, J. Goff, J. Carrico, B. Hardy, RAAN-agnostic 3-burn Departure 
Methodology for Deep Space Missions from LEO Depots, AAS/AIAA Astrodynamics 
Specialist Conference, 20 – 24 August 2017 Stevenson, 2017. Washington, USA. 
[12] R. Whitley, R. Martinez, Options for Staging Orbits in Cis-Lunar Space, IEEE 
Aerospace Conference 5-12 March 2016, Big Sky, Montana, USA, 2016. 
[13] R.P. Jewett, et al., Hydrogen Environment Embrittlement of Metals, 1973. NASA 
Technical Report CR-2163. 
[14] G. Szatkowski, Centaur Extensibility for Long Duration, AIAA SPACE Conference, 
San Jose, California, USA, 2006, 19 September 2006. 
[15] B.F. Kutter, Atlas Centaur Extensibility to Long-Duration In-Space Applications, 
AIAA SPACE Conference, Long Beach, California, USA, 2005. 
[16] S. Sakla, Centaur Test Bed (CTB) for Cryogenic Fluid Management, 42nd AIAA/ 
ASME/SAE/ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, 09-12 July 2006, 2006. 
Sacramento, California, USA. 
[17] B.F. Kutter, F. Zegler, G. O’Neil, B. Pitchford, A Practical, Affordable Cryogenic 
Propellant Depot Based on ULA’s Flight Experience, vols. 9–11, AIAA SPACE 2008 
Conference & Exposition, San Diego, California, 2008. September 2008. 
[18] M.E. Evans, L.D. Graham, A flexible lunar architecture for exploration (FLARE) 
supporting NASA’s artemis program, Acta Astronaut. 177 (2020) 351–372. 
[19] V.P. Dawson, M.D. Bowels, Taming Liquid Hydrogen: the Centaur Upper Stage 
Rocket 1958-2002, the NASA History Series, National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration Office of External Relations, Washington, DC, USA, 2004. 
[20] D. Bienhoff, Commercial cislunar transportation: from LEO to the Moon and all 
points in between, Moon Village Association Workshop 2 (2018) 4–5. November 
2018 Los Angeles, California, USA. 
[21] D.A. Smith, SLS Mission Planner’s Guide, Advanced Development Office (XP70), 
NASA, 2014, 24 February 2014. 
[22] A.C. Charania, D. DePasquale, Economic analysis of a lunar in-situ resource 
utilization (ISRU) propellant services market, Proceedings of the International 
Astronautical Congress (IAC) IAC-07-A5.1.03 (2007) 1–17. 
[23] R. Bate, D. Muller, J.E. White, Fundamental of Astrodynamics, Dover Publications, 
New York, 1971. 
[24] Standard Prices for Aerospace Energy Category Items, Defense Logistics Agency, 
USA, 2020. 
[25] Falcon Heavy users guide, https://www.spacex.com. 
[26] M. Hayhurts, et al., Mission Operations Cost Estimation Tool (MOCET), 2015 NASA 
Cost Symposyum 25-27 August 2015, Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, 
California, USA, 2015. 
[27] R.S. Hamada, The effect of the firm’s capital structure on the systematic risk of 
common stocks, J. Finance (1972) 435–452. May issue. 
[28] L. Gori, B. Chizzolini, S. Gatti, Features and Determinants of Risk in Investment 
Choices by Private Equity Fund, BAFFI CAREFIN Centre, 2017. Research Paper No. 
2016-25. 
[29] H. Markowitz, Portfolio Selection in The Journal of Finance 7 (No. 1) (1952) 
77–91. 
[30] M. Miller, Debt and taxes, J. Finance 32 (2) (1977) 261–275. 
[31] H. DeAngelo, R.W. Masulis, Leverage and dividend irrelevancy under corporate 
and personal taxation, J. Finance 35 (2) (1980) 253–264. 
A. Sommariva et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            