 P r o c e d i a  -  S o c i a l  a n d  B e h a v i o r a l  S c i e n c e s    1 1 9   (  2 0 1 4  )   6 5  –  7 4  
1877-0428 © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license. 
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the IPMA.
doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.03.010 
ScienceDirect
27th IPMA World Congress 
Toward project and program management paradigm in the space of 
complexity: a case study of mega and complex oil and gas 
development and infrastructure projects 
Hiroshi Tanaka * 
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 1-1, Asahi-dai, Nomi-shi, Ishikawa-ken,  923-1211, Japan 
Abstract 
The author published his research paper at 26th International Project Management Association World Congress in which he 
argued that the monodukuri industry, or broadly hard systems project industry, is being affected either positively or negatively 
by a variety of complexity categorized by P.E.S.T.L.E. (political, economic, social, technological, legal and environmental) 
factors and proposed a conceptual model of an enterprise viability system reinforced by meta program management. This paper 
is based on the author’s continuing meta program management research and contextual analysis of the project industry, traces 
how the typical events discussed under each of the PESTLE factor categories have behaved thereafter to confirm the validity of 
impact descriptions, and presents a case analysis of current mega oil and gas development and complex infrastructure projects 
for dominant characteristics of project operations. Then new thoughts of project and program management in the space of 
complexity of the project industry are proposed as the first step to build a new management paradigm, which has been 
qualitatively induced by the cases under study and are deriving from existing research results on complex projects.   
The new thoughts include meta program management to balance multi objectives; knowledge and stakeholder integration to 
create complex projects; finance planning and structuring as an essential ingredient of materializing complex projects; 
management of extreme projects; and contingent risk management. 
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the IPMA. 
Keywords: Project industry; complex projects; meta program management; knowledge integration; new paradigm of project management 
* Pr. Hiroshi Tanaka Tel.:+81-42-734-7358; fax:+81-42-734-7358. 
   E-mail address: hirojpmf@wta.att.ne.jp  
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
© 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license. 
Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the IPMA.

66   Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
1. Research background and framework 
While we are experiencing a slowdown in project investments in the mature economies caused by the global 
economic recession and the tight-rope operation of the Eu ropean Monetary System, investments in oil and gas 
development by multi-national oil companies and major natio nal oil companies, and in social infrastructures by 
governments and private funds, in the emerging and de veloping economies, are steadily increasing according to the 
World Development Indicators database (World Bank, 2013), the report of the World Economic Forum 2012 on 
strategic infrastructure (World Economic Forum, 2012) , the infrastructure development report of the Asian 
Development Bank (Asian Development Bank, 2009) and the annual reports of the multinational oil companies. It 
is noted as we observe in Section 3 of this paper that financial and physical sizes, as well as complexity, of oil and 
gas and infrastructure development projects have been upscaling exponentially over the past five years or so.  
However, project management research has not caught up with this rapid development of the project industry, or 
the industry related to social infrastructure and natural resources development due to a time lag usually occurring 
between the state of the projects and scientific research based on data or a lack of researchers having live 
knowledge of the industry. This fact has motivated the aut hor to initiate developing a conceptual framework to fill 
the knowledge gap on project and program management paradigm on contemporary complex projects. This paper 
is based on the author’s qualitative analysis of the state of the project industry dealing with recent major-sized 
complex projects which are reported in economic newspapers, journals and public or business firms’ websites; and 
contextual interpretation of the dimensions and character istics of those projects, by using the author’s 42-year 
experience in the engineering-procurement-construction (E PC) industry for oil, natural gas and infrastructure 
projects, his recent research on meta program management, and related recent research on project complexity by 
others.  
  The research step is as follows: 
1.) Continuing monitoring of the complexity events listed in the author’s 2012 paper (Tanaka, 2013) for the 
verification of impact analysis, 
2.) Review on typical ongoing mega oil and gas and in frastructure projects for multiple project objectives, 
unique features and complexity factors, and extraction of dominant characteristics of project operations, 
3.) Literature review on project management research on complex projects, and 
4.) Deriving new thoughts on program management that should be applied to major-sized and complex 
energy and infrastructure development projects as the first step to build a new management paradigm. 
  Considering that despite the professional and academi c demarcation between a project and a program, as most 
industry branches do not use the term “program” even if a major-sized project as described so is actually or 
virtually a program according to the professional definition, both complex projects and programs are hereafter 
referred to solely as “projects” with an adjective “complex”, but management of these projects is referred to as 
“program management”  as managing complex projects should be distinguished from project management focusing 
on delivery which is mostly based on positivist management processes and operational techniques.  
Here, the definition of complex projects borrows that of “Complex Project Management Competency Standards 
Ver. 4.1” and P2M (PMAJ, 2007). Complex projects are highly strategic, emergent and adaptive systems 
comprising either a major-sized project or a program that are characterized by an embodied holistic entrepreneurial 
mission; high-profile project modeling as a holistic project mission entrains high uncertainty in scope definition, 
hence scalability, while adapting to changing environm ents; recursiveness as they mobilize a variety of 
stakeholders having multiple objectives, enabling means (technology, etc.), and financing options; and nonlinear 
feedback loops.  
2. Behaviors of complexity events in the project industry 
Tanaka (Tanaka, 2013) listed typical complexity events in the world that are affecting the monodukuri industry 
by categorized P.E.S.T.L.E. (political, economic, social, te chnological, legal and environmental) factors, nature of 
the respective events’ complexity and their implication to the industry. The monodukuri industry was defined as the 
industry of manufacturing and systems environment integration. For analysis purposes of this paper, the first 

67 Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
element of the definition, manufacturing, is dropped, and the industry of systems environment integration is re-
worded as the project industry. The listed complexity even ts, relevant to the project industry, have further been 
monitored as summarized below based on a variety of media reports -- only news reported by plural media are 
depended on -- to confirm relevancy of the analysis; the code within a parenthesis indicates the pertinent category 
of the PESTLE factors.  
  
New state leaders in France, Russia, China (P) :  The new state heads of France, Russia, China and Japan (Japan 
not listed in the 2012 paper) have all announced and are committed to positive infrastructure project export 
policies: France, under state leadership, is stepping up its systems export to the emerging and developing 
economies and promoting ties with Japan in infrastructure exports with its early results including Mitsubishi Heavy 
Industry-AREVA joint venture (with GDF Suez)’s securing the US$ 20 billion contract for Turnkey’s No. 2 
Nuclear Power Plant in Synop on the Black Sea, announced in May 2013, and TECHNIP-JGC Corporation 
consortium’s award of Yamal LNG Export Terminal on the Russian Arctic Sea which is estimated to cost US$10 
billion, announced in April 2013; Russia is committing the Arctic zone oil and gas deve lopment, Russian Far East 
development among other major project  investments; China has promised additional development packages to 
African countries during New President Xi Jinping’s official visit to the African countries in April 2013; Japan is 
stepping up packaged infrastructure exports to emerging  and developing economies and participating in Russian 
natural gas developments, which all in all will boost the project industry - Prime Minister Abe himself is 
performing top state sales of Japanese infrastructure and high technology.  
Iranian sanction (P): The previously one of the most active oil and natural gas project markets in the world, of Iran,  
is totally frozen due to the political and economic sanction to the country. 
Arab Spring (P):  Foreign project investments are further being stalled in the countries concerned and a backlash of 
the Arab Spring has been manifested in some project scenarios. 
Myanmar “early” spring (P):  Both Western and Asian project interests, viz. investors, developers and contractors, 
are lining up in Myanmar eyeing for a new infrastructure development market planned to grow fast.  
Persistent worldwide economic recession (E), EURO cris is (E), Escalating presence of BRICS, ASEAN (E), 
Aggressive resources hunt by emerging economies (E):  The current primary marketing focus of the infrastructure 
project industry based in EU and Asia is on the BRICS and ASEAN countries, which in turn are hunting natural 
resources in part of BRICS (Russia, Brazil), African and Central Asian countries. 
Remarkable shortage of infrastructure in fast growing countries (E):  The countries in Asia (Southeast, South and 
Central Asias) fast-growing in economy entertain evenly serious shortage of infrastructure to support the rapid 
increase of population and urban development, which fact has prompted the respective governments to formulate 
specific infrastructure augmentation plans. The high hurd le to the implementation of the government plans is 
finance gaps or infrastructure needs which cannot be financed by public sector -- refer to paragraph 4.3 of this 
paper. 
Commercialization of shale natural gas production (T):  The success in the commercialization of shale gas 
production in the U.S.A. has drastically changed the long-range scenario of fossil fuel supply in the world; led the 
U.S.A. to one of the top positions in the natural gas reserve and production; and increased the competitiveness of 
the U.S. manufacturing industries. Its effect of pulling down the world prices of natural gas has affected Russian 
supply of natural gas to EU and pushed the country to accel erate sanctions of four mega-sized liquefied natural gas 
(LNG) production projects in Russia. 
3. Dimensions and characteristics of mega and complex projects  
   To elucidate the sizes and unique complexity dimensions  at a glance, typical mega projects in progress in the oil 
& gas and infrastructure sectors is given in Table 1. The information sources are shown in the footnote.  The table 
indicates the commonly used title of th e project with a project ID code, host country of the project, estimated 
investment value of the project, planned completion time, project features inviting complexity and information 
source reference to the footnotes. As seen, most use the title of projects, and not programs, though they are 
programs according to the definition of the project management discipline. 

68   Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
Table 1. Typical recent mega and complex energy development and infrastructure projects in the world 
Project Name Host Country Planned 
investment 
amount 
(B: billion) 
Planned 
completion 
Project features Data 
Source 
[Project a.] 
Pearl GTL Project Qatar US$18 to 
19B 
2013 
(production 
started in 2011) 
The world’s largest natural gas to liquids 
(GTL) production complex to produce 
alternative high-value petroleum products; 
joint venture of Shell and Qatar 
Government; program management contract; 
10+ prime contract packages, 56 thousand 
project personnel from 60+ countries; 
excellent project performance and 
governance; viability of alternative energy 
solutions established 
1 
[Project b.] 
Ichthys  LNG 
Project 
Australia US$34B 
(Phase I) 
2016 
(ongoing) 
8.5 million  tons/year LNG production and 
export (onshore/offshore); multi investors, 
multi contractors; remote site; own source of 
LNG for Japan with nuclear power plants 
shutdown 
2 
[Project c.] 
Vladivostok LNG 
Project 
Russia US$36B 2018 
(investment 
decided by 
Gazprom) 
15 million tons/year LNG production and 
export (offshore/offshore facilities); multi 
investors, multi contractors; remote site; 
Russia to increase LNG export   
3 
[Project d.] 
Cabo Delgado LNG 
Project 
Mozambique US$10 to 
15B 
2018 
(investment 
decided: under 
front-end 
design) 
10 million tons/year LNG production and 
export (onshore/offshore); multi investors 
(US-Japan) joint venture, multi contractors; 
remote site 
4 
[Project e.] 
Delhi-Mumbai 
Industrial Corridor 
Project 
India US$90B Phased 
(ongoing) 
Accelerated national economic development; 
India-Japan government-to-government 
strategic partnership program; 
debottlenecking trunk export traffic systems 
with a high-speed freight train network & 
associated infrastructure development; 
industrial clusters; flagship eco-smart cities; 
multi objectives, multi-layer state program 
and multi stakeholders 
5 
[Project f] 
Russian Arctic Oil 
and Gas 
Development 
Program 
Russia US$500 to 
700B 
2020 
(partially 
ongoing) 
Arctic oil and gas fields development (100 
billion tons oil equivalent of potential 
resources); racing against ice-breaking 
offshore oil & gas development technology; 
two base-load LNG production complexes,  
associated infrastructures; extreme projects 
at super-remote sites 
6 
[Project g.] 
King Abdullah 
Economic City 
Saudi Arabia US$30 to 
86 billion 
2020 
Futuristic mega city with a seaport, high 
speed railway, industrial valley, central 
business district, residential areas, 
educational zone, resorts; multi objectives, 
multi investors, multi owners, multi 
developers 
7 
[Project h.] 
Russian Far East 
Region Overall 
Russia US$110 2025 
Modernization of the Siberian railroad 
systems, ports and other trade facilities, city 
infrastructures; industrial estates; energy 
8 

69 Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
Development 
Program 
development; multi objectives, multi 
investors, remote projects 
[Project i.] 
Moscow 
International 
Business Center  
Project 
Russia US$40B 2018 
Urban infrastructure for the New City - new 
traffic systems, eco energy, city water/waste 
management systems; national prestige; 
multi developers, multi owners, multi 
finance sources 
9 
[Project j.] 
Masdar City Project UAE-Abu 
Dhabi 
US$18B 2020 -2025 
(ongoing) 
Futuristic eco-smart city to test the country’s 
future growth and diversification strategy; 
race against evolving technology 
10 
[Project k.] 
Tangshan Smart 
City Project 
China US$800B 2025 – 
(ongoing) 
Futuristic eco-smart community including an 
industrial valley; establishing a leading 
model to demonstrate national prestige 
11 
Data source: 
1. Shell global Pearl GTL website http://www.shell.com/global/aboutshell/our-strategy/major-projects-2/pearl.html, Hydrocarbons –
technology website http://www.hydrocarbons-technology.com/projects/pearl/  
2. INPEX Ichsys LNG Project website   http://www.inpex.co.jp/english/ichthys/index.html, 
http://gateway.icn.org.au/project/451/ichthys-lng-project 
3. Gazprom project website http://www.gazprom.com/press/news/2013/april/article160730/  
4. Anadarco website http://www.anadarko.com/Investor/Pages/NewsReleases/NewsReleases.aspx?release-id=1769213  
5. DMIC Project home page  http://delhimumbaiindustrialcorridor.com/  
6. Is Russia ready for Arctic challenges, Petroleum Intelligence Weekly 29/03/2013 issue 
http://www.energyintel.com/Pages/About_PIW_Datasource.aspx  
Offshore oil and gas development in Russian Arctic zones  
http://gasoilpress.com/dgir/dgir_detailed_work.php?DGIR_ELEMENT_ID=280&WORK_ELEMENT_ID=5565  
7. King Abbdulah Economic City home  http://www.kingabdullahcity.com/  
8. Moscow Approves New Funding to Develop Far Eastern Regions                                            
http://www.jamestown.org/single/?no_cache=1&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=40726&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=381&cHash=257
5a4665b2ae1869fc22bb73c1bb8aa  
9. Project brief    http://www.designbuild-network.com/projects/mibc/   
10. Project home  http://masdarcity.ae/en/  
11. Program home http://en.tswstc.gov.cn/news_detail/newsId=6d95ed4a-b72c-4573-b7c0-0bd56add0a4e.html  
        Note: some estimated project costs are taken from parallel news sources 
  Salient characteristics of these mega projects that augment complexity include (the codes within parentheses refer 
to the corresponding project codes in the table): 
y Requirements of huge investment costs which per se present a significant source of great risk and mandate 
innovative finance engineering and risk management (project a. through k.)  
y Multi objectives entertained by the projects, e.g. a ll or most of, enhancing national prestige, creating 
eminent future values, up-scaling new or alternative technology, investment return (project a. through k.) 
y Multi owners and investors from multi countries required to meet an enormous fund requirement or to 
combine source technologies and expertise to compose a complex project (project a. through k.)  
y Multi contractors from multi countries to reap on combined benefits and to hedge risks inherent in 
awarding a prime contract to a single contractor as well as to couple export credits provided by multiple 
countries as tied to top-tier contractors of the countries (project a. through k.) 
y Multi vendors from multi countries to realize technologically right and most economical sources (project 
a. through k.) 
y Tens of thousands workforces from multi countries to meet a required quality and quantity of skilled 
construction workforces (project a. through k.)  
y Compounding emerging technologies as in eco-sma rt community development that mandates races 
against technological advancement (project e. through k.)  
y Uncertainty associated with project implementation over an extended period of time, such as changes in 
PESTLE factors and resultant scalability (upward or downward) or risk of project cancellation after 
project start (project a. through k.) 
y Logistic challenges, especially on mega projects at remote sites (project a. through k)  

70   Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
y Unparalleled environmental risk (project b., c., d., f. )  
4. New thoughts of project and program management toward a new management paradigm 
   Based on the analysis of the characteristics of the mega and complex projects reviewed above, new thoughts of 
(project and) program management are proposed by the author. These new thoughts are preliminary and should 
evolve with further feedbacks from these mega projects to eventually build a new adaptive management paradigm. 
4.1. Meta program management to balance multi objectives  
    To manage mega and complex projects with numerous interactions of complexity factors, we need program 
management beyond program management as traditional project management and program management founded 
on positivist management approaches and operational techniques, e.g. for project governance, cannot deal with 
projects characterized by multi objectives and multi layers of stakeholders with specific interests which are not 
always well aligned each other, progressing technology, uncertain project environment and, all in all, scalability as 
projects pursue evolving definitions. All of the above-listed projects have many of such complexity profiles as a 
degree of disorder, uncertainty, non-linearity, irregularity, instability, requirement for innovative and highly 
creative thoughts, multiplicity, scalability, recursiveness, requirement for management by praxis (and not by 
process), requirement for heuristic logic, directional complexity such as unshared goals and paths and temporal 
complexity such as results from unanticipated environmental impact (Tanaka, 2013). Bredillet (Bredillet, 2008). 
states that project management needs to be understood as a complex discipline because it aims to deal with 
complex, uncertain, ambiguous reality. In mathematics, since Ashby (Ashby, 1958) and the law of requisite variety, 
it is well known that to control a complex system with n dimensions, you need an n+1 dimensional system. The 
available control variety must be equal to or greater than the disturbance variety for control to be possible. The 
author regards the following three methodologies as basis of developing a meta program management framework. 
   Complex Project Manager Competency Standards Ver. 4.1 (International Centre for Complex Project 
Management, 2012) provides valuable insights into complex projects by stating these standards move away from 
traditional philosophies, approaches and languages, which cannot adequately describe complex projects; instead 
these standards use a Systems Thinking philosophical approach and methodology . The standard views provide 
insights from multiple perspectives, that together provide holistic understanding of the project management of 
complexity, stresses using multiple views and behaviors suited to complex sets of interactions arising from 
cognitive and emotional responses to dynamic conditions.  
  Tanaka (Tanaka, 2013; Burkov, et al. 2011) defines meta program management as a meta framework of program 
management beyond the traditional program management and is for organizations’ strategy implementation to 
apply their organizational resources and capabilities for attaining major capital investments or carrying out major 
innovation initiatives for enhanced organizational value and/or any form of transformation while responding 
flexibly to changes in the ecosystem. This concept of meta program management reflects the meta-method, or 
“MAP - Management and Analysis of Projects” - aiming at providing effective and efficient structure and process 
for acting and learning in various complex, uncertain and ambiguous managerial situations of projects, programs 
and portfolios (Bredillet, 2008),  and embraces program visioning and conceptualization founded on a holistic 
mission carrying multi objectives; planning and modeling; structuring; implementation; and the exploitation of 
program products, as against the traditional program management which means managing a collection of projects 
that are organically combined with each other and hence could better be managed in a combined form. This 
category of meta program management should serve as a development and planning framework for complex 
projects in which a project is seen as a politico-socio-techno-economic system (Bredillet) as reviewed in Section 3 
above, and project modeling is not straight forward and must pursue series of simulations based on a holistic 
program mission coming from an organization or jointed organizations’ strategy to craft unique and significant 
future values and to cope with changing PESTLE factors. It is observed that Tanaka’s meta program management 

71 Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
model is active in the Japanese project industry which is participating in projects a. to f. and h. to k. of the above 
project table, in such aspects as (Burkov et al., 2011).: 
y Engineering driven projects that require ingenium to a varying degree, 
y Continuous project development by combining diverse technology, engineering disciplines, management 
methods and finance engineering in dialectic environment, 
y Heavy use of “ba” theory (Nonaka, 1991) where program/project participants and other key stakeholders 
contribute to collaborative knowledge and hence value creation through modeling, practicing, learning 
and feeding back, and,
y 8VHRIFRQYHQWLRQVIRUIURQW-HQGSODQQLQJRIDSURJUDPSURMHFWLQXQLTXHHQYLURQPHQW
   Morey (Morey, 2011) refers to meta-program management as a new approach to drive momentum and achieve 
coordinated outcomes across large complex public infrastructure programs, from his experience in managing a 
complex alley of public infrastructure program in South East Queensland, Australia. He defines meta program 
management as “a centrally sponsored group of programs and projects that are delivered by a number of discrete 
self-governing organizations, and centrally coordinated to achieve outcomes that are of strategic importance”.  
This meta-program management model should find its utmost value in a cluster of government development 
programs under a holistic, strategic growth policy of a certain country or region/state. 
4.2.  Knowledge and stakeholder integration to create complex projects 
In project management as a complex integrative field (Bredillet, 2004), knowledge-based management is 
crucial. Bredillet relates meta manageme nt in project context to the effect that respectful on the various project 
management perspectives in presence, while providing an  integrative ontological and epistemological framework 
the meta approach is about designing a contextual structure that: 
• Provides a privileged place for project (and program) managers, project team members and stakeholders to 
act and learn,  
• Facilitates this praxis through a specific meta-method, one of the underlying paradigms being that there is a 
co-evolution between the subject/actor and his or her environment (praxeological epistemology) and, 
• Enables to generate a specific conven tion (configuration of order) and some kind of stability to cope with 
uncertainty and ambiguity. 
   Integration of multiple elements of knowledge held by  multiple stakeholders can be illustrated in Fig 1. with 
reference to Kosaka’s three dimensional, knowledge fusion space model (Kosaka, 2010). 
Fig. 1. Meta program management space as a platform of knowledge integration 


72   Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
   A meta program management space serves as a platform of knowledge and stakeholder integration. Knowledge 
elements required to realize a program design based on a holistic program mission, characterized by resonance to  
PESTLE trendes, are integrated on a program modeling space called a mission-profiling platform. Knowledge 
structuring and integration is performed as a function of a.) existing knowledge elements and identified new 
knowledge required to meet the program design, b.) stakeholders possessing enabling means, including knowledge 
elements, funds (financing abilities) and management capabilities, c.) financing options, and d.)  program delivery 
alternatives such as front-end engineering (FEED) rolled over to engineering, procurement and construction (EPC), 
design-build-own and public-private-partnership (PPP). On major-sized, complex projects, knowledge spiral 
(Nonaka, 1991) is realized through a program mental space as a platform of shared context in motion for 
collaborative knowledge and value creation (Burkov et al., 2011). 
4.3. Finance planning and structuring as an essential ingredient of materializing major-sized projects 
   No projects are materialized without funds procured for a particular project. For instance, according to Asian 
Development Bank, in Asian countries alone (except Japan), the total required investment amount for 
infrastructures, including those for energy, telecommunications, transportation, water and other social services, 
planned by relevant governments, amounts to US$10 trillion or 5 to 6% of GDP in 2020, as drastically increased 
from US$4 trillion in 2010; however, finance gaps, or infrastructure needs which cannot be financed by the public 
sector, of US$750 billion per year, are anticipated during the 2010 䡚2020 period (Asian Development Bank, 
2009).  
   Except for “P2M - Project and Program Management for Enterprise Innovation Japan (Project Management 
Association of Japan, 2007), no chapter or section is dedicated to finance planning for projects/programs in the 
project management and program management standards used globally. 
   Program managers of complex projects need fundamental knowledge of finance and involvement in finance 
scheme planning although professional transactions of finance are conducted by finance specialists. The 
knowledge in question include that on alternatives of financing for projects, e.g., combining direct project 
investments by owners of component projects; official export credit(s) by export credit agency (ies), including 
syndicated loans; government development funds; project finance; public-private-partnership (PPP) as well as on 
structuring multi-source financing packages. Also, financing scheme development in relation to risk-based project 
investment decision is an essential ingredient of new program management paradigm. 
4.4. Management of extreme projects 
   There emerges an increasing number of mega resources development projects involving extreme project 
implementation conditions at remote locations such as oil and gas field development in deep seas, oil sands and 
shale oil development at remote sites such as deep North Canada and Siberian basins, and oil and gas development 
in the Arctic zone. These extreme projects require unconventional degrees of care and measures to protect human 
safety in rough project execution environment, habitat and other natural environment and built facilities; prepare 
against attack by natural perils as well as mandate heavy planning and problem solving of project logistics. 
Continuing feedback of related experience is needed to build a body of knowledge of managing extreme projects 
as part of meta program management.   
4.5.  Contingent risk management 
The mega and complex projects involve unique and systemic risks, including those not experienced by project 
and program management to date, and cannot rely on traditional risk models. Traditional risk models perceive risk 
as primarily objective and identifiable, and utilize primarily reductionist, linear processes such as mathematical and 
statistical models (Kämpf et al., 2011).  
We see a number of research papers, recommended practices and industrial state reports published recently 
regarding unique risks and risk management in specific situations of complex projects such as value of flexibility 
in managing uncertainty in oil and gas investments (Begg, 2002); risk management in the Arctic offshore (Kämpf 

73 Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
et al., 2011); offshore oil and gas development in Russian Arctic zones (Nikitin et al, 2006); risk management of 
shale gas developments and operations (Det Norske Veritas AS, 2013); risk management on (Canadian) oil sands 
(Canadian Oil Sands, 2012); cross-cultural project manage ment on major-sized global oil and gas plant projects 
(Tanaka, 2007); global infrastructure investments in times of crisis (Lin, 2012); risk management challenges for 
complex infrastructure projects (Holmes, 2011); manageability of complex construction engineering projects 
(Leitejen, 2009); transition from comparative risk assessme nt to multi-criteria decision analysis and adaptive 
management in complex environmental policy design (Linkov, 2006); key principles of strategies and principles in 
leading complex projects (Obelensky, 2013). Of these, the following two research literatures are considered to 
provide high quality input to a new paradigm of contingent risk management for complex projects. 
M. Kämpf and S. Haley of University of Alaska Anchorage, in their paper “Risk Management in the Arctic 
Offshore: Wicked Problems Require New Paradigms” (Kämpf and Haley, 2011), points out the flaws of traditional 
risk models for complex projects and examines how various groups with interests in the Arctic offshore define 
risks. The findings link the wicked problem framework - that  of problems that are unstructured, complex, irregular, 
interactive, adaptive, and novel - and the emerging paradigm of project management of the Second Order,”PM-2” 
(Saynisch, 2010). The research synthesizes literature on the topic to offer strategies for navigating wicked 
problems, provide new variables to deconstruct traditiona l risk models, and integrat e objective and subjective 
schools of risk analysis.    
I. Linkov, et al. conducted a comprehensive research on environmental risk assessment and decision-making 
strategies over the last several decades (Linkov, et al., 2006) and argued that although comparative risk assessment 
(CRA) has mainly been used in environmental risk assessment over the decades, as CRA lacks a structured method 
for arriving at an optimal project alternative, multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) provides better-supported 
techniques for the comparison of project alternatives base d on decision matrices, and it also provides structured 
methods for the incorporation of project stakeholders' opinion s in the ranking of alternatives, and that the inherent 
uncertainty in our ability to predict ecosystem evolution and response to different management policies requires 
shifting from optimization-based management to an adaptive management paradigm. The author supports this 
concept of a combination of MCDA  and adaptive management as it has applicability to complex energy 
development and infrastructure projects planned under  multiple objectives and often conflicting stakeholder 
interests and needing highly adaptive management to PESTLE environment which is common to all of the listed 
case projects.  
5. Conclusion 
This paper expands the existing research on complex project management and meta program management. It
verifies the nature of complexity of major-sized projects in the oil and gas development and infrastructure industry, 
presents case studies of current global mega projects for identifying discriminant characteristics contributing to 
unique project complexity and as a result qualitatively proposes new thoughts of project and program management 
in the complexity space in the related project industry. The new thoughts include meta program management to 
balance multi objectives; knowledge and st akeholder integration to create comp lex projects; finance planning and 
structuring as an essential ingredient of materializing complex projects; management of extreme projects; and 
contingent risk management, which should be elaborated with continuing feedbacks from the ongoing major-sized 
projects in study to form a new paradigm of project management. 
  
References 
Asian Development Bank (2009). Infrastructure for Seamless Asia. A joint study of the Asian Development Bank and the Asian Development 
Bank Institure. Manilla: Asian Development Bank 
Ashby, R. (1958). Requisite variety and implications for control of complex systems. Cybernetica, (1): pp. 83-99. 
Bredillet, C. (2004). P2M - toward a new project & program management paradigm?. Proceedings of International P2M Forum  
       2004. Tokyo: Project Management Association of Japan. 

74   Hiroshi Tanaka  /  Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences   119  ( 2014 )  65 – 74 
Bredillet, C. (2008). Learning and Acting in project situations through a meta-method (MAP) : a case study: Contextual and situational 
approach for project management governance in management education. International Journal of Project Management. Vol.26 (3): pp.238–
250.  
Burkov, V., Bushuyev, S., Tanaka, H, Konstantin, K. Sergey,S., Rhyzhkov,S., et al. (2011). The theory of the balanced innovatio n model. 
Project-oriented competitive science intensive enterprises creation and development  (monograph, Russian-English bilingual) pp.71-94. 
Nikolayev: Ukrainian National University of Shipbuilding named after Admiral Makarov & Torubarov ES ( ISBN 978-966-2312-18-8) 
Canadian Oil Sands (2012). Canadian Oil Sands Annual Report 2011 - Risk Management pp. 41-47. Canada: Canadian Oils Sands Limit ed 
http://www.cdnoilsands.com/files/COS_AR11_FULL.pdf 
DET NORSKE VERITAS AS (2013). Risk management of shale gas developments and operations – Recommended Practice DNV-RP-U301: 
Norway: DET NORSKE VERITAS AS 
Holmes, A. (2011). Risk management challenges for complex infra projects. Infrastructure Journal Supporting Infrastructure Investment.  
     British Consulting   http://www.britishconsulting.com/en/i.journal-aug-2011-risk-management.pdf 
International Centre for Complex Project Management (2012). Complex project manager competency standards, version 4.1. Sydney: 
International Centre for Complex Project Management
Kämpf, M et al. (2011). Risk management in the Arctic offshore: wicked problems require new paradigms. ISER Working Paper 2011. 3. UAA 
University of Alaska Anchorage Institute of Social and Economic Research  (ISER) 
Kosaka, M. (2010). An approach to knowledge growth models (in Japanese) p.62. Tokyo: Shakaihyoronsha Co., Ltd 
Leietjen, M. (2009). Manageability of complex construction engineering projects: Dealing with uncertainty.Second International Symposium on 
Engineering Systems MIT: Cambridge, Massachusetts, June 15-17  
Linkov, I et al. (2006). From comparative risk assessment to multi-criteria decision analysis and adaptive management: Recent d evelopments 
and applications. Environment International 32 , pp 1072-1093: Elsevier 
Lin, J. Y. and Doemeland, D. (2012). Beyond Keynesianism: Global infrastructure investments in times of crisis. Policy Research  Working 
Paper 5940. Washington: The World Bank Development Economics Vice Presidency Office of the Chief Economist 
Morey, A (2011). Meta-program management: A new approach to drive momentum and achieve coordinated outcomes across large comple x 
public infrastructure programs.Australia: ARUP http://www.arup.com/_assets/_download/6c639c0f-19bb-316e-400b9def809e45ce.pdf. 
  
Nonaka, I. (1991). The knowledge-creating company. Harvard Business Review, 69(NovemberDecember) pp.96-104. 
Obelensky, N. (2013).Leading complex projects - key principles and strategy. Australia: International Centre for Complex Project Managment 
Project Management Association of Japan (2007). P2M – a guide of project and program management for enterprise innovation (2nd English 
Edition). Tokyo: Project Management Association of Japan 
Saynisch, M. (2010). Mastering complexity and changes in projects, economy, and society via project management second order (PM -2). 
Project Management Journal, 41(5), pp. 4-20, Wiley/PMI USA. 
Tanaka, H. (2007). Cross-cultural project management on major-sized global oil and gas plant projects. In D. I. Cleland & L.R. Ireland (Eds), 
Project manager’s handbook – Applying best practices across global industries pp.151-165. New York:McGraw-Hill  
Tanaka, H. (2013) . A viable system model reinforced by meta program management. Procedia - Social and Behavioural Sciences Journal, 74, 
pp. 135-145: Elsevier 
World Bank (2013). World Development Indicators, April 2013. Washington: World Bank: 
World Economic Forum (2012). Strategic infrastructure: steps to prioritize and deliver infrastructure effectively and efficient ly.World 
Economic Forum 2012 reports. Geneva: Word Economic Forum 